     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

     CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1998 18:13:46.00

     SUBJECT:     INS referm and HIB visas

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro. ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukure/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Elena,

     Any referm that we recemmend to. the HIB pregram will likely cause
     employers to. raise ether issues related to. immigratien and the Laber
     Department. The fellewing are a ceuple ef pelicy issues that we may have
     to. cenfrent as part ef this precess.

     1.         Laber Certificatien

             As the Laber felks indicated yesterday, empleyers use the HIB
     pregram as a way to. get fereign werkers into the ceuntry fast -- shert
     applicatien and no. laber certificatien precess (as there generally is with
     the permanent empleyment-based visa pregram).   Thus, any changes that
     limit er mere clesely subscribe the use ef the HIB may cause empleyers to.
     fecus en what they believe is wreng with the laber certificatien precess,
     as presently perfermed by the Laber Department.

             The CIR recemmended that the Laber Department no. lenger perferm
     labor certificatien prier to. the issuance ef a permanent empleyment-based
     visa, largely because it takes them tee leng and because the teels that
     they use do net fairly reflect the dynamics ef the laber market.    The CIR
     did net suggest an alternative methed fer testing the laber market to
     determine if workers are needed in a particular jeb category, but
     suggested, as part of their everall prepesal, that State semehew take care
     of it.  The Carnegie felks suggested, infermally, that the functien ceuld
     be contracted eut to. a private entity who. ceuld de the laber market tests
     mere quickly and maybe better.

             This is an issue that we likely need to. fecus on as part ef the
     overall INS referm package and as it relates to. the HIB pregram.  As yeu
     weuld imagine, any prepesal to. change the laber certificatien precess is
     very centreversial -- particularly any propesal to. eliminate Laber's rele
     in perferming a market-test as a predicate to. an empleyment-based
     permanent visa.

     2.         Empleyer Sanctiens

             The CIR recemmended that Laber sheuld be empewered to sanctien
     empleyers fer failure to. verify whether their employees are autherized to.
     werk. Under the current system, if a Laber Department inspecter discevers
     that an empleyer is not verifying autherizatien to. werk (as demenstrated
     by their net filling out the I-9 ferms), they refer the case to. the INS --


Labor has no authority to sanction the employer for this violation., The
eIR and others have suggested that Labor have this sanction authority, in
part b/c referrals to the INS for this are almost never followed up on.

        In preliminary discussions about this, Labor expressed some
concern that their increased role in enforcing the immigration laws might
chill the reporting of other labor violations by undocumented workers.
However, Labor already has a role (by checking for I-9 violations and
reporting them to INS) and this increased authority could be understood as
enforcing labor laws (that relate to the labor market), not immigration
laws. The chief opponents to this change would likely be Republicans on
the Hill who are concerned with businesses not being penalized for hiring
illegals at all. This opposition could be significant, but the concept of
sanctioning employers for failing to take steps designed to ensure that
they hire legal workers is a strong one. Also, this is a good companion
to our successful push last year to launch an employer verification pilot
program, to improve the system of verifying whether employees are
authorized to work.


Aside from the concerns that relate to the Labor Department, there are two
areas of policy decision-making that we may want to resolve in conjunction
with the INS reform.   These are both less pressing, but are likely
important to keep an eye on.'

1.      State Department and Visa Issuance

         For employment-based visas issued overseas, there are three
players:   INS, State and Labor. Many (including the eIR, State and INS)
have commented that this current process is duplicative. One suggested
reform would be to remove State from doing a separate analysis of the
application, and limiting their role to checking to ensure that there were
no international or foreign policy restrictions on the applicant (checks
with Interpol, etc.).   Under the current system, State often readjudicates
the visa petition rather than,perform a more limited check.   State has
also identified a need for greater clarity regarding ultimate
responsibility for certain decisions (like this one) where more than one
agency plays a role.

        We may, as part of our proposed reform, want to better clarify
State's role as limited to international/foreign policy concerns only.

2.      Immigration appeals

        Under the current system, administrative review of immigration
decisions is conducted by numerous entities located at the various
agencies (State, Labor and Justice).   In addition, the Bureau of
Immigration Appeals (BIA) --' a 15 member panel appointed by the AG -- has
nationwide jurisdiction over a wide range of cases, including decisions of
Immigration Judges in exclusion, deportation, and removal decisions.
Decisions of the Bureau of Immigration Appeals are reviewed by the
Attorney General. The eIR recommended the creation of an independent body
within the Executive Branch to hear all appeals of immigration-related
administrative decisions, including deportation hearings. Decisions by
this entity would be binding on the Executive Branch.

        We have not yet fully explored whether the existing immigration
appeals system needs dramatic reform or, if so, whether we would recommend
a solution along the lines of that proposed by the eIR.  It is not clear
that this question has to be answered in the short term, but we may want


to keep it within our sites.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 023 - FOLDER -009


[01/30/1998 - 0210211998]


