RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1998 11:50:00.00

SUBJECT:   Heads up on a couple of education issues

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
A couple of things are developing that you need to know about.

1. Class Size/tobacco:   Barbara Chow has some state-by-state runs
comparing various medicaid formula to our class size formula and to the
child care formula.  She's going to try to put together a meeting
tomorrow, with the three of us, Jen Klein and whoever from OMB tobacco wor
ld is appropriate, to try and figure out how to deal with different needs
and expectations reo formula.  I'm going to try and get a copy of the runs
later today; I'll share with you whatever I get.

On a related note, ED staff are desperate for some kind of briefing on
tobacco that will give them a big picture, and help them deal with
questions from ed.groups and the hill.   I think this would be useful, even
if it only enables them to give more sophisticated nonanswers than they
can give now.  I think there are 3-4 people at ED who need this (Mike,
Scott Fleming, Susan Frost) and me.    Could one of you do this, or is
there someone better? Are there talking points or Q's and A's we could
use instead?

2. Coverdell Tax Free Savings Accounts: Apparantly this is going to be
marked up in Senate Finance somet.ime in the next few weeks, and we are
trying to put an Administration position together. Here is the lay of the
land as best as I can tell;
Riley is still adamantly opposed, and wants an Administration
a1ternative--tax free saavings accounts that are not targeted to
education, but which could be used for any purpose
Treasury is likely to be adamantly opposed to ED's proposal on the grounds
that it is bad tax policy
Senate Dem's on Finance Committee are apparantly ok with Coverdell, will
probably vote for it, and believe that POTUS will sign it.   Do you have an
insight on this? POTUS signed the letter last year saying he would veto
balanced budget deal if it included Coverdell, but I was never sure that
his opposition was particularly strong or long-lilved.
There is some interest among Senate Dem's in a modified version of
Coverdell that would not allow the savings account $ to pay for private
school tuition, but would allow it for related education expenses--tutors,
books, transportation to and from school, etc.   Last year we thought this
was bad tax policy too-- undesirable disributional impact, and too easily
subject to abuse (like using the $ to buy your kid a car which he happens
to use to drive to school).
There is also an idea beginning to take shape to trade Coverdell for
School Construction, with everybody walking away with something.
Barbara Chow reports that Podesta is very concerned with the constituency
group politics in this, and is therefore likely to side with Riley in
oppostion to Coverdell.



I'm going to a DPC/NEC/OMB/ED/Treasury meeting this afternoon. Any
guidance for me? My sense is to see if we can come up with an option that
ED and Treasury will both like (not likely) and to see if the
Coverdell-for-Modernization deal could work. While I never thought
Coverdell is a particularly good idea--its benefits are skewed to upper
income families, are small overall ( a few bucks for most middle class
families), I also have had a hard time seeing this as a voucher quite the
way Riley does.


