RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-FEB-1998 11:51:59.00

SUBJECT:   Constitutionality of Liquor "Advertising Targeted at Children

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You asked about whether we could impose restrictions on liquor advertising
targeted at children. With respect to the constitutionality of laws which
restrict liquor advertising vis-a-vis minors, the latest federal appellate
case that addressed this issue involved the City of Baltimore.     In
November 1996, in Anheuser-Busch, Inc. and Penn Advertising of Baltimore,
Inc. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City, the Fourth Circuit
upheld the constitutionality of restrictions on cigarette billboard
advertising in areas frequented by children.   The Fourth Circuit held that
the Baltimore ordinance was constitutional because "BaltimoreD,s ordinance
attempts to protect its children in a manner and with a motive distinct
 [from the broader Rhode Island prohibition held unconstitutional by the
Supreme Court) and in accord with an unbroken chain of Supreme Court cases
which indicate its desire to ensure that children do not become lost in
the marketplace of ideas."

        From the Baltimore case, we can glean three principles that must
be present to uphold any restriction on liquor advertising:

1.       It must advance a legitimate government interest, and reducing
the demand for alcohol and cigarettes by minors has been held to be a
legitimate government interest.
2.       It must be a narrowly tailored, and be no more restrictive than
necessary.   It cannot be a sweeping ban on advertising.  BaltimoreD,s
cigarette advertising ordinance -- and a similar one restricting
advertisements for alcohol -- targeted billboards, sides of buildings and
freestanding signs in "publicly visible" locations.   For instance, the
court stated: "More significantly, Baltimore does not ban outdoor
advertising of alcoholic beverages outright but merely restricts the time,
place, and manner of such advertisements. And BaltimoreD,s ordinance does
not foreclose the plethora of newspaper, magazine, radio, television,
direct mail, Internet, and other media available" to liquor
advertisements.
3.      There must be some demonstration of empirical evidence that the
ban will advance the stateD,s interest in promoting temperance.   In
Baltimore, the city acted only after holding public hearings and receiving
evidence.

         However, no one appears confident that this case law will remain
static. Cases' have recently been filed in Chicago, Oakland, and New York
"that involve liquor advertisements.  Let me know if you need anything
else. Mary


