 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:10-FEB-1998 19:45:36.00

 SUBJECT:   Bilingual

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Got the copy of the Chris Edley note you sent me re bilingual education
 and Unz. Here's where I think we are:

 1. As you know, a WH delegation is going to Cal later this week to tough
 base with opponents and proponents of Unz.  In my view, the most important
 thing we can get from these discussions is a good handle on the level and
 sources of pressure for his to publicallyoppose Unz, and the likely
 consequences (for the President, for the VP, for the initiative) for
 taking a public position.

 2. If and when we decide to take a position on Unz, I expect it will need
 to include the following points:
 We want all kids to learn English, as fast as possible, and to learn their
 academic subjects as well.
 LEP kids need extra help in doing this.   That's what bilingual education
 is for--to give kids the extra help to learn English and their academic
 subjects.
 Bilingual ed doesn't do this as effectively as it must.   Therefore, we are
 in favor of the following changes   (to be determined)  to bilingual ed
 (I've asked Riley and Smith to give us recommendations here; they are both
 convinced that some changes are needed, and are far more likely to come up
 with something useful than the bilingual ed. program will.    They have not
 settled on anything specific yet.)
 The Unz initiative makes the wrong kind of changes. It won' ,t help kids
 get a better education, and it is so prescriptive that it doesn't give
 teachers, parents and local school officials the flexibility to design the
 right program for their kids.

 3. While I know there are concerns that we take a position sooner rather
 than later, it's not clear to me yet that's the right way to go.   If you
 haven't seen it, there is a piece in Sunday's Outlook section that
 basically says that the Republican's in California are scared to death of
 this issue, and don't want to get crosswise with the Hispanic community
 again. Karen Skelton has argued that our involvement would mobilize
 Wilson and other R's to 'come out against this, and its going to pass
 anyway.  If this is right, than we may be more helpful by not having the
 President weigh in (but maybe Riley instead).   I'm just not sure yet.

 4. We have not yet dealt with the Hispanic Caucus on this   (its good we
 haven't, because it would have made getting their support on the Goodling
 testing vote more difficult).  I suspect this may be the trickiest part.
 The education groups I've talked to expect the Hispanic's in the
 California delegation to be actively opposed to Unz.  I don't know how
 happy the Caucus will be with any changes we might propose to the federal
 bilingual education program. And, I don't know how all of this will
 intersect with the testing issue--though if it turns out that the Caucus
 really wants us to come out against Unz, and if we all agree that we have
 to make clear that the point is for kids to learn English, then I want to
'...
       look for a way to get some leverage.over the Caucus on the tests.

       5. I expect that some of this could be as divisive internally as was the
       testing issue last year. So, so far I've kept just about all of this to
       myself.


