     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Ellen S. Seidman ( SEIDMAN_E)    (OPD)

     CREATION DATE/TIME:14-MAR-1996 10:42:12.68

     SUBJECT: prodcuts problems

     TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E      (WHO)
     READ:14-MAR-1996 11:00:58.91

     TO: Jon Yarowsky                               YAROWSKY J      (WHO)
     READ:15-MAR-1996 12:25:18.58

     TO: James J. Jukes                             JUKES J      (OMB)
     READ:14-MAR-1996 11:15:32.42

     TEXT:
     These are in page order, not order of importance:
     1. Findings and purposes (particularly the findings):    These were in the House
     bill and dropped in the Senate because they were so inflammatory, but they are
     obviously there to deal with Lopez (yes, I've learned a case name).    I would
     like to say that while there may be problems with the civil justice system,
     these assertions are unsupported by any record and in fact contrary to [DOJ]
     research.   If we can say something good about civil juries and the constitution
     I'm for that too.
     2. There are federalism issues in a number of places, where the bill tries to
     define, e.g., an evidentiary standard, that is clearly a matter of state law.
     See definition of "clear and convincing evidence,""punitive damages."     (The
     definition of clear and convincing was in the Senate bill, but the punitive
     damages def was not.]
     3. On page 14, line 18, the term "or threat of remediation" was deleted from
     the Senate bill.   I couldn't parse that phrase, but undoubtedly EPA will think
     the deletion is important. We might want to check with them.
     4.  Section 103(b) (1) - pages 16 and 17 - This is John Yarowsky's favorite
     demagogue provision.   It says that if a foreign manufacturer isn't available for
     suit, you can bring suit against the seller, thereby putting foreign
     manufacturers in a better position than domestic manufacturers.    We need to be
     careful how we phrase any objection, but there is fun to be had here.
     5.  I don't quite understand how the affirmative defenses -- drugs, misuse or
     alteration, etc. might work in a class action.   I think this problem has always
     been there, but can we make something of it?
     6.  Statute of limitations/statute of repose. We might think two years is too
     short, but I think it fair to say the statute of limitations is better than it
     has been. On the statute of repose, however, in addition to dropping to 15
     years, there is a specific non-uniformity provision, which says any SHORTER (but
     not longer) state statute governs.   You (we) might want to compare pages 15 and
     18 of the conference report to show how inconsistent this is.
     7.  Punitives:
              The Senate bill said the harm had to be the "result" of the act; this
     says "proximate cause." That's much tighter.    Think of the smoking cases --
     death by heart attack may well result from smoking, but my guess is you can't
     get someone to declare smoking to be a proximate cause.
              Take a look at pages 25 and 26 - it's an incredible gift.   Since they've
     dropped the voluteer/state carveout from punitives, paragraph (3) should be
     deleted.   However, since they've let us in on the secret, we can now point out
     that they have allowed punitives NOT to be limited with respect to others even
     when they commit crimes, hate crimes, etc.
              The factors for additur are absurd, and the conference report on page 21
     makes it clear the provision is not to be used -- that gives an opening to


 complain even though the factors were in the Senate bill.
          Note that the additur doesn't apply to small entities, but we can't
 complain about this because (i) it was in the Senate bill and (ii) the President
 implicitly supported it in Texas.
          State remittitur is still allowed, but state additur is forbidden
 8.   There is still several liability for noneconomi damages, which was one of
 the major points in our May statement.
 9.   I don't understand the workmens' comp stuff, but it's the same as the
 Senate, as far as I can see.
 10.   I don't know how we can get this in, but finding (6) on the biomaterials
 stuff (page 37) relies on the fact that the FDA regulates the safety and
 EFFICACY of devices.   The very same people who are bringing you this bill want
 to delete the efficacy provision in the FDA reform act.
'11.   Finally, there's the whole federalism/uniformity issue. We haven't made
 the point before publicly, but whether/when cases will get to federal courts of
 appeals for uniform decisions is very iffy, particularly with the no federal
 question jurisdiction provision.   I think we can say it will not meet the goals
 of uniformity because of myriad state court interpretations, but we may have to
 be subtle about it.
 See you at 11:30.
 ellen


