RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-FEB-1998 18:33:41.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Answers to McCain Questions

TO: Toby Donenfeld ( CN=Toby Donenfeld/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ]            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Donald H. Gips ( CN=Donald H. Gips/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP]             )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]          )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jill M. pizzuto ( CN=Jill M. Pizzuto/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]          )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Donna L. Geisbert ( CN=Donna L. Geisbert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft cover letter and draft answers to the McCain questions
prepared by HHS, DOJ, and USTR.  I will also distribute paper copies, if
needed. Let me know if you need anything else. Mary ==================== ATTACHMEN
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D59]MAIL46626345V.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C0050000010A020100000002050000008B1F000000020000FF4572C434994C26DAB9E6
30CEB2FC8BF4170B142821D9E2840158E030770E9417AC3AC6A548AD79AA13AEC8FD887C72D518
C4E83666B13F6D3FEFD85257783CCD35D39A81F6D9FC14BOBCC91EFC23B44A157832B7380266E5
812150DB334569FECA76BFD05056B1732C4ACFC949177D7EFD57741BD78EB67BC55F69EB3A8795
F91B050602943E656463F16B4B3654007818C015ECCC87A3D1FFFAB2AFF966880055031EC90199
58B2155561FF8312125704297CE5585B21E740AC5BAD8336B314580C3F84ED37DDB43D1209C50F
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

[Note: For the underlined section, preferred by HHS, the Department of Justice would prefer the
paragraphs that are in boldface and in italic.]

Dear Mr. Chairman:

        The Clinton Administration looks forward to working with you and others in Congress to
develop legislation that will reduce teen tobacco use'. In addition to the enclosed responses to
your questions, we are prepared to provide the appropriate staff to give the Committee the
technical assistance you request. We also are providing you with a number of resource
documents cited below that we hope will be of assistance as you work to develop comprehensive
legislation to protect our nation's children from tobacco related disease and death.

        To protect children and adolescents, FDA adopted comprehensive regulations restricting
the sale and distribution of nicotine-containing tobacco products in its final tobacco rule issued
August 28, 1996. The rule's advertising and access restrictions were based upon a multi-year
investigation, and resulted from the analysis of myriad studies and research on issues related to
reducing youth tobacco use and the consideration and analysis of more than 700,000 comments
submitted in response to its proposed rule. FDA detailed its analysis and findings in two
documents: a proposed rule and preamble published in 60 Fed. Reg. 41314 (August 11, 1994);
and a final rule and preamble published in 61 Fed. Reg. 44396 (August 28, 1996). Copies of
those documents are provided with this response and citations to pages in those documents are
provided. In addition, FDA's administrative record contains the studies described in those
documents as well as public comments received by the agency. That record is contained on 5
CDs, which are provided. Two new studies on the effect of advertising on young people, and a
collection of studies and reviews on the effectiveness of warning labels also are provided.
Finally, two other documents are provided: The Institute of Medicine's Report, Growing Up
Tobacco Free. Preventing Nicotine Addiction in Children and Youth (1994) (10M); and the
Department of Health and Human Services' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
Report, Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People. A Report o[the Surgeon General (1994)
(1994 SGR). These two reports contain summary discussions about tobacco advertising and its
effect on young people. See especially 1994 SGR Chapter 5 and 10M Chapter 4.

Many of the provisions included in S.1414 would codify the comprehensive regulations on
nicotine-containing tobacco products that the FDA adopted in its final Tobacco Rule issued
August 28,1996. The FDA restrictions were carefully crafted on the basis of a multi-year
investigation, and resultedfrom the analysis of myriad studies and research on the effects of
advertising, specifically tobacco advertising, on young people and the consideration and
analysis of more than 700,000 comments submitted in response to the proposed FDA rule.

       The Administration believes, as the Department of Justice has explained at length in
the FDA litigation, that the FDA's regulations that restrict the advertising of tobacco products
are consistent with the First Amendment, under the currently controlling framework for. First
Amendment review of restrictions on advertising, set out by the Supreme Court in Central
Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp. v. Public Servo Comm'n, 447 U.S. 557 (1980), and subsequent
cases. The FDA restrictions would, ifimplemented, substantially advance the Government's
wholly legitimate and compelling interest in curtailing minors' demandfor and use of tobacco
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

products by reducing minors' exposure to tobacco product advertising. Moreover, the FDA's
regulations are tailored to serve this objective.

        We believe the advertising restrictions in S.1414 that track the FDA regulations are
constitutional. Other re!!trictions contained in S.1414 give rise to constitutional concerns that
are not presented by the FDA regulations, such as whether such restrictions would be
sufficiently tailored to serve the governmental interest in reducing teenage smoking. In any
event, it is important to emphasize that any comprehensive tobacco legislation should provide
express statutory reaffirmation of the FDA 'sjurisdiction and authority to impose additional
advertising restrictions based on substantial evidence when the agency determines that such
additional restrictions are necessary, efficacious, and constitutionally tailored.

        To assist the committee in developing legislation regulating tobacco products,
including legislation restricting the advertising of tobacco products, we have provided with
this response copies of the two documents which detail the analysis andfindings on which the
FDA regulations are based: the FDA's proposed rule and preamble published in 60 Fed. Reg.
41314 (August 11,1994); and the FDA 'sfinal rule and preamble published in 61 Fed. Reg.
44396 (August 28,1996). Our answers to your questions include citations to these documents
where appropriate. In addition, the FDA's administrative record contains the studies
described in those documents as well as public comments received by the agency. That record
is contained on 5 CD's, which are also provided with this response. Two ...

        We hope this material is helpful and we look forward to providing you and the members
of the Committee with any additional assistance that may be needed.

                                            Sincerely,


                                            ????


Enclosure
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.                                           He-x-Dump Conversion



I.     BAN ON OUTDOOR ADVERTISING, INCLUDING IN STADIA AND ARENAS

       I.      What data does the administration have to substa~tiate that a ban on outdoor
               advertising, including stadia and arenas, will reduce smoking and, in particular,
               youth smoking?

        The FDA tobacco rule prohibits outdoor advertising within 1,000 feet of public
playgrounds and elementary and secondary schools. All other outdoor advertising is restricted
to black text on a white background, devoid of color and imagery. FDA's regulations are based
on the agency's finding that children and adolescents spend a great deal oftime in areas around
schools and playgrounds and these areas, therefore, should be free of tobacco product
advertising. All other outdoor advertising should be restricted to text information only, which
generally is not appealing to young people. (See response to II, below.) Data supporting this
conclusion are detailed at 61 Fed. Reg. 44501-08.

       2.      To what extent do you believe such restrictions can be expected to reduce
                             smoking?

        FDA's advertising restrictions are based on quantitative and qualitative studies of
cigarette advertising that show that a causal relationship exists between tobacco advertising and
tobacco use by young people and that stringent advertising restrictions, when combined with a
comprehensive program designed to reduce initiation and use among young people, will have a
positive effect on reducing smoking rates and youth tobacco use.

        FDA's findings regarding the ability of advertising restrictions to reduce youth tobacco
use are summarized at 60 Fed. Reg. 41330-34 and 61 Fed. Reg. 44466-500.

       3.      Does the administration support such a ban. If so, why? If not, why not?

         The administration supports appropriate restrictions on outdoor advertising, as evidenced
by the FDA tobacco rule (21 C.F.R. 897.30(b)) which prohibits outdoor advertising for cigarettes
and smokeless tobacco, including billboards, posters, or placards, from being placed within 1,000
feet of the perimeter of any public playground or playground area in a public park, elementary or
secondary school. All other outdoor advertising is limited to black text on a white background
(21 C.F.R. 897.32(a)).

        The prohibition set forth in Section 101(a)(l), however, would prohibit "any form of
outdoor tobacco product advertising, including bill boards, posters, or placards." It does not
contain the exception for tombstone advertising in certain locations that is included in the FDA
regulation. Because that exception ensures that the FDA regulations are appropriately tailored to
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

serve the government's substantial interest in reducing teenage smoking, Section 101(a)(I)'s
broader restriction on all outdoor tobacco advertising raises significant constitutional concerns
that are not presented by the FDA regulations.

       4.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing the
               ban would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

         As discussed above, the administration's efforts have been focused on supporting the
restrictions now codified in FDA regulations. The administration urges Congress to provide
statutory confirmation of the existing authority of the FDA to regulate the outdoor advertising of
tobacco products. The resources of the administration are available to assist the Committee in
determining whether further restrictions are constitutional and otherwise appropriate.


II.    BAN ON HUMAN FIGURES AND CARTOON FIGURES IN ADVERTISING

       1.      What data does the administration have to substantiate that barring the use of
               human figures and cartoon advertising will reduce smoking, in particular youth
               smoking?

        FDA's regulations restrict advertising, with certain exceptions, to black text on a white
background. No color or imagery is permitted. These restrictions encompass a prohibition of
human figures and cartoon characters. The restrictions apply to billboards, publications, in-store
advertising, and direct mail advertisements. FDA's findings in this area are summarized at 60
Fed. Reg. 41335-36 and 61 Fed. Reg. 44466-68,44508-13. FDA's Federal Register documents
contain specific evidence and summaries of studies. See 60 Fed. Reg. 41333-34 and 61 Fed.
Reg. 44475-82.

       2.      To what extent do you believe such restrictions can be counted on to reduce youth
               smoking?

       See response to 1.2., above.

       3.      What entity would you propose to determine what constitutes a human image or
               cartoon character?

         Under the FDA's regulations, the requirement that tobacco advertisements under most
circumstances use black text on a white background is enforced by the Food and Drug
Administration and the Department of Justice under the provisions of the Food, Drug, Cosmetic
Act. That Act provides for the imposition of civil penalties, 21 U.S.C. § 333(t), injunctive
relief, 21 U.S.C. § 332, and/or criminal prosecution, 21 U.S.C. § 333(a).


                                                 2
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

       4.      What penalty do you believe is appropriate and should accrue for a violation of
               the prohibition on material containing figures determined to be human or cartoon?

         Under the FDA's regulations, the requirement that tobacco \ldvertisements under most
circumstances use black text on a white background is enforced by the Food and Drug
Administration and the Department of Justice under the provisions of the Food, Drug, Cosmetic
Act. That Act provides for the imposition of civil penalties, 21 U.S.C. § 333(f), injunctive
relief, 21 U.S.c. § 332, and/or criminal prosecution, 21 U.S.C. § 333(a).

       5.      Does the administration support this ban? Ifso, why? If not, why not?

         The administration supports appropriate advertising restrictions, as evidenced by the FDA
tobacco rule. Section 101 (b) of S. 1414 provides that "[n]o manufacturer, distributor, or retailer
may use a human image or a cartoon character or cartoon-type character in its advertising,
labeling, or promotional material with respect to a tobacco product." This restriction would go
beyond the FDA regulation restricting the useof images in the advertising of tobacco products,
which provides that, in general, tobacco advertising must take the form of tombstone advertising
but permits images to be used without restriction in an "adult publication," one whose readership
is at least 85 percent adult and includes less than two million children. 21 C.F.R. §
897.32(a)(2)(i)-(ii) .. The provision's broader restriction on the use of images in the advertising of
tobacco products would raise significant constitutional concerns that the FDA regulation does not
present.

        In any event, the administration urges the Congress to provide statutory confirmation of
the existing authority of the FDA to regulate the use of images in the advertising of tobacco
products. This regulatory approach would ensure that the FDA would be authorized, based on
existing and future research, to develop necessary and appropriately tailored supplements to its
current restrictions, if and when such supplements are needed.

       6.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing the ban
               would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

      As discussed above, the administration's efforts have been focused on the restrictions
now codified in FDA regulations. The resources of the administration are available to assist the
Committee in discussing how these restrictions will be implemented and the associated penalties,
and whether further restrictions are constitutional and otherwise appropriate.


III.   BAN ON INTERNET ADVERTISING

        1.     Does the administration support such a ban? If so, why? If not, why not?
        2.     How can and should a ban on Internet advertising of cigarettes be enforced?

                                                  3
                                                             He.x-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.


       3.      What, if any, concerns does the administration have regarding the
               constitutional free speech issues raised by any such ban?

       4.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing the
               ban would the administration propose?

        In response to IlL 1 - IlIA, the administration believes that, because there may be more
narrowly tailored means of achieving the government's underlying interest in restricting the
advertising of tobacco products on the Internet, the categorical prohibition that Section 101 (c) of
S.14l4 would impose would raises significant constitutional concerns. See Reno v. ACLU, 117
S.Ct. 2329,2348 (1997) (explaining that compelled tagging schemes are obvious less restrictive
alternative to banning Internet transmission of content harmful to minors). We would therefore
caution the Congress about adopting such a broad measure at this time.

        In order to ensure that the government retains necessary flexibility to regulate the
advertising of tobacco products on the Internet, we recommend that the Congress provide express
statutory confirmation ofthe FDA's existing authority to regulate such advertising. This
regulatory approach will ensure that any future restrictions are targeted at the right forms of
Internet advertising and are fashioned in a manner that is appropriately sensitive to First
Amendment concerns. Alternatively, we are prepared to work with Congress to fashion a more
narrowly focussed Internet restriction.


IV.    BAN ON POINT-OF-SALE ADVERTISING

       1.      What data does the administration have to substantiate that a ban on
               point-of-sale advertising would reduce smoking, in particular, youth
               smoking?

        See responses to 1.2. and II.l., above, regarding FDA's proposal restricting point-of-sale
advertising. In its tobacco rulemaking, FDA found that young people get their information and
product imagery from all types of advertising, including at the point of sale. See 61 Fed. Reg.
44509 - 44510. Point-of-sale advertising presents the child with an enticement at the time when
purchase is immediately available.

         Manufacturers and retailers limited to text- only advertising at point of sale will not be
prohibited from promoting products at retail. Adult consumers looking for price and product
information will be able to find that information even without imagery and colors, which are
particularly attractive to children. While text-only advertising can still be effective with adults,
it will have less allure and be less appealing to young people. Children and adolescents, who are
less willing than adults to process print information in a leisurely setting (such as reading a

                                                 4
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

magazine), will find textual material even less appealing in the few moments spent at the retail
counter.

       2.      Does the administration support such a ban? If so, why? If not, why not?

       The administration supports appropriate restrictions on point of sale advertising, as
evidenced by the FDA tobacco rule. As discussed above, its efforts have been focused on
supporting the restrictions now codified in FDA regulations. The resources of the
administration are available to assist the Committee in determining whether further restrictions
are constitutional and otherwise appropriate.

       3.      Is the exemption of point-of-sale advertisement for adult stores and tobacco
               outlets appropriate?

         The administration's focus has been on preventing children and adolescents from using
tobacco products. Restrictions on the advertising that makes these products appealing to young
people is a vital component of these efforts. FDA's regulations exempt adult-only locations and
publications read primarily by adults because the evidence then available showed that advertising
in locations where children are never present, such as adult-only locations, or are rarely exposed,
as is the case with publications with an insignificant youth readership, would not have a
significant adverse effect on efforts to reduce youth tobacco use.

       4.      Is it appropriate to grant companies with greater cigarette market share
               additional point-of-sale advertising rights? If so, why? If not, why not?

       5.      Does such a privilege constitute a statutorily granted competitive advantage?
                If so, why? If not, why not?

       6.      Does the administration support this grant? If so, why? If not, why not?

       7.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing the
               ban would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

         Section 101 (d) would impose a general prohibition on the use of what is termed
"point-of-sale advertising" of tobacco products but would include a significant exception for
"adult-only stores and tobacco outlets." Sec. 101 (d)(2). The FDA regulations contain
restrictions that are targeted at point-of-sale advertising, however, they are not as broad as those
set forth in S.1414 primarily because they do not prohibit tombstone advertising. See 21 C.F.R.
§§ 897.32, 897.16. The resources of the administration are available to assist the Committee in
crafting restrictions on point-of-sale advertising that avoid any significant constitutional concerns
that the restrictions on point-of-sale advertising in S.1414 would raise.


                                                 5
                                                               Hex-Dump Ccnversicn

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

       Section 101 (d)'s exception permitting manufacturers with a greater market share to
engage in more point of sale advertising than their competitors appears inconsistent with the
government's asserted interest in restricting such advertising. Granting manufacturers
point-of-sale advertising opportunities consonant with market share is unrelated to the objective
ofreducing youth tobacco use; indeed, it may run counter to that goal. Moreover, the proposal
presents constitutional and anti-competitive concerns that should be addressed. The resources of
the administration are available to assist the Committee in exploring those concerns.

V.     LIMITATIONS ON POINT-Of-SALE ADVERTISING

       1.      What data does the administration possess to suggest that such limitations will
               reduce smoking, particularly among youth?

       See response to IV .1., above.

       2.      Does the administration support this provision? If so, why? If not, why not?

       The administration supports appropriate restrictions on point of sale advertising, as
evidenced by the fDA Tobacco Rule. As discussed above, its efforts have been focused on
supporting the restrictions now codified in fDA regulations. The resources of the
administration are available to assist the Committee in determining whether further restrictions
are constitutional and otherwise appropriate.


VI.    BAN ON ADVERTISING RESTRICTION AGREEMENTS

       1.      Are such agreements currently against federal or state law? If so, is such a
               provision necessary?

        Ordinarily, under the free market system, retailers are permitted to decide from whom and
to whom they will buy and sell, and on what terms. While an agreement of the sort described--
between a manufacturer and a retailer to limit the ability of a competing manufacturer to display
advertising on the retailer's premises -- might be anticompetitive under certain circumstances,
such agreements are usually not condemned under the federal antitrust laws. The administration
has not undertaken a review of state laws to determine whether such an arrangement would
violate the law of any state.

       2.       Does the administration support such a provision? If so, why? If not, why
              . not?

       The administration's primary concern is not the relationship of retailers, manufacturers,
and distributors between or among one another with respect to advertising. Rather, the

                                                6
                                                           He.x-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

administration wants to ensure that point-of-sale advertising and promotional material, whatever
their source, consist only of black text on a white background.


       3.     Does the administration support the limitation. If so, why? If not, why
              not?

       See answer to question 2 above.


       4.     What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implement the ban
              would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

       See answer to question 2 above.


VII.   GLAMORIZATION OF TOBACCO

       1.     What data does the administration possess to indicate whether and to what
              extent this provision will reduce smoking, particularly among youth?

        A number of studies (Tye 1990; Terre, Drabman, and Speer 1991; Hazan, Lipton, and
Glantz 1994; Thumbs Up! Thumbs Down! 1997) show that depictions of tobacco use in the
entertainment media, particularly feature films, are on the increase and exaggerate greatly the
actual prevalence of tobacco use in the U.S. population. Research also suggests that adolescents
are highly susceptible to pro-smoking messages and images conveyed in entertainment media
(Signorielli 1993; Davies 1993; Basil 1997). Focus group research found that young people are
able to recall virtually no anti-smoking messages on TV or in the movies, yet they are able quite
readily to recall specific movies that portray smoking and to identify actors and actresses who
smoke in their entertainment roles (Mermelstein 1997). Deglamorizing tobacco use in the
entertainment media can be achieved both by decreasing pro-smoking cues and by increasing
anti-smoking cues. A study by researchers at the University of California at Irvine suggests that
anti-smoking ads before movies can help inoculate young people against the positive images of
smoking that appear in movies. Ninth graders who watched the movie "Reality Bites" (in which
the cast smokes in about one-third of the scenes) preceded by a California Department of Health
Services anti-smoking ad were much less likely to find smoking exciting compared with teens
who watched the movie without the counter-advertisement (Pechmann, 1996).

       2.     What entity does the administration propose will determine what activity
              constitutes promoting the image or use of a tobacco product?

       3.      How does the administration envision such a ban will be enforced?

                                               7
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.


       4.      Does the administration support such limitations?

       5.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language would the
               administration propose? Please provide specifics.

         In response to Questions VII.2 - VII.5, the administration believes that the scope of the
restriction on glamorization in S. 1414 is unclear. For example, is the provision intended only to
restrict attempts to promote certain brand names of tobacco products or is it intended to restrict
the promotion of smoking generally? If the latter were the case, then the provision would appear
to reach some noncommercial speech, raising significant constitutional concerns. It is also not
clear what is meant by the use of the word "promoting." Finally, the phrase "appeals to
individuals under 18 years of age" could be subject to challenge on vagueness grounds.

        Alternatively, no such constitutional concerns would be raised if Congress enacted
legislation that would confirm the authority of the FDA to regulate the advertising of tobacco
products through such indirect means as the use of product placement agreements.


VIII. RESTRICTIONS ON COLOR ADVERTISEMENTS

       1.      What data does the administration have to substantiate that a ban on color ads,
               except in publications with limited youth readership, will reduce smoking
               particularly youth smoking?

       See response to II.l., above.

       2.      Does the administration believe that the threshold for the restriction of two
               million readers is the appropriate threshold?

        FDA's tobacco rule requires that advertising be restricted to black and white text, except
in publications that are read primarily by adults or in adult-only facilities. The text-only
requirement is intended to reduce the appeal of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco advertising on
young people without unduly affecting the informational messages conveyed to adults.
Therefore, FDA proposed in its rulemaking that advertising in publications that are read
primarily by adults should be allowed to use imagery and color because the effect of such
advertising on young people should be nominal. The agency set the definition of adult
publication as those whose readers age 18 or older constitute 85 percent or more ofthe
publication's total readership, or those which are read by two million or fewer people under age
18, whichever method results in the lower number of young people. (Magazines with small
readership numbers but which appeal to young people may not attract two million young readers
but may still be primarily youth oriented; that is, 15 percent or more of their readers are under

                                                8
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

18.) In addition, the agency noted that at some point, the number of underage readers is so great
that the publication can no longer be considered to be of no interest to those under 18, regardless
of the percentage of the readership. For example, a magazine with a large total readership base
may attract as many as 5 million young people, or more, but those numbers would still not be 15
percent of the magazine's readership. See 60 Fed. Reg. 41335-36 and 61 Fed. Reg 44513-19.

       3.      How does the administration envision readership demographics being
               determined?

        In its tobacco rulemaking, FDA explained that readership demographics would be
determined by measuring the total number of people that read any given copy of a publication.
Readership demographics would be measured according to industry standards and, at a
minimum, would be based on a nationally projectable survey of people. Two examples of
currently available surveys are Simmons's STARS and MediaMark Research Inc.'s (MRI's)
TEENMARK. FDA also indicated that it would be willing to work with industry on this issue.
See 61 Fed. Reg. 44516-19.

       4.      How would this restriction be enforced?

       The restriction would be enforced by the Food and Drug Administration and the
Department of Justice under the provisions. of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act which
provides for the imposition of civil money penalties, 21 U.S.C. § 333(f), injunctive relief, 21
U.S.c. § 332, and/or criminal prosecution, 21 U.S.c. § 333(a).

       5.      Does the administration support this restriction? If so, why? If not, why
not?

        The administration supports the regulation in the FDA rule based upon the findings of the
Food and Drug Administration regarding the role and attractiveness of images and color in
advertising to young people. See, e.g., 61 Fed. Reg. 44467-68, 44509 (1996).

       6.      What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing the
               restriction does the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

       As discussed above, the administration supports effective restrictions on the use of color
and imagery in tobacco advertising. The administration urges Congress to provide statutory
confirmation of the existing authority of the FDA to regulate the advertising of tobacco products.


IX.    GENERAL QUESTION REGARDING MARKETING/ADVERTISING BAN

       1.      Can the marketing and advertising restrictions envisioned in the settlement

                                                 9
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

               be constitutionally imposed, with or without the industry's consent? Please
               discuss.

         The answers to Parts I-VIII above address the government's authority to impose
restrictions on advertising and marketing without the industry's consent. We address here the
degree to which "the industry's consent" may affect the constitutional analysis of the advertising
restrictions.

        We believe that the constitutional analysis of such restrictions might be affected if the
industry's adoption of those advertising restrictions that either could not be constitutionally
imposed upon the industry, or that exceed the restrictions that are imposed by the FDA
regulations, were in some way made contingent upon the industry's willingness to adopt them.
For example, we believe that the inclusion of such restrictions in state court consent decrees
between states and tobacco manufacturers -- rather than in federal legislation -- would
significantly increase the likelihood that the restrictions would be upheld if challenged in the
future. However, the inclusion of such restrictions in a federal statute that made adherence to
such restrictions a condition of the receipt of certain federal benefits would continue to raise
substantial constitutional questions. Such a statute, depending on how it were framed, would be
subject to substantial challenge under the unconstitutional conditions doctrine.


X      WARNING LABELS

        1.     Does the administration believe that these are appropriate warning labels?

       The administration supports the concept of strengthening warning label statement
requirements. Several recent studies (Health Canada 1996; Borland, Cappiello, and Hill 1996;
Robinson and Killen 1997) and literature reviews (USDHHS 1994; 10M 1994 ) are available
concerning the effectiveness of warning labels in conveying information to consumers. The
administration's resources are available to help the Committee evaluate possible improvements to
warning label requirements.

       2.      Does the administration possess data suggesting that these warnings will
               effectively reduce smoking, particularly youth smoking?

         See response to X.l., above.

       3.      What data suggests that the various new warnings will be as or more effective
               than the current warning requirements?

       See response to X.l., above.


                                                10
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

       4.     Does the administration support the provisions authorizing specific new labels?
              If so, why? If not, why not?

       5.     What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language implementing this
              provision would the administration propose? Please provide specifics?

       As stated above, the administration is available to work with the Committee in
determining whether changes to the warning statement requirements are appropriate.


IX.           WARNING LABEL SIZE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS

       1.     What data does the administration have to suggest that these specifications will
              reduce smoking, particularly youth smoking?

       See response to X.l., above.

       2.     Does the administration support these particular specification? If so, why? If
              not, why not?

       3.     Does the administration support the exception provided for flip-top cigarette
              packages? If so, why? If not, why not?

       4.     What specific changes, if any, in the legislative language to implement these
              restrictions would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

         The administration, as discussed above, has focused its efforts on supporting the
restrictions now codified in FDA regulations. The resources of the administration are available
to assist the Committee in determining whether further restrictions are appropriate.


X.            SMOKELESS TOBACCO AL TERNA TlVE LABELS

       1.     What data does the administration have to suggest that the various new warning
              labels will effectively reduce the use of smokeless tobacco, particularly among
              youth?

       See response to X.l., above.

       2.     Does the administration support the use of these alternative labels?

       3.      What changes, if any, to the legislative language implementing this provision

                                               11
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

               would the administration propose? Please provide specifics.

         The administration, as discussed above, has focused its efforts on supporting the
restrictions now codified in FDA regulations. The resources of the administration are available
to assist the Committee in determining whether further restrictions are appropriate.


XI.    ENFORCEMENT OF ADVERTISING, MARKETING AND LABELING
       RESTRICTIONS

       1.      Does the administration support the enforcement provisions regarding
               advertising, marketing and labeling? If so why? If not, why not?

        Section 114 of the bill provides FTC with the authority to enforce sections 111 and 112,
the provisions relating to warning statement requirements. Section 114 also contains a penalty
provision for violations of section 113, the requirement that companies provide ingredient
information to the Secretary of HHS pursuant to a new provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act, and authorizes the FTC to bring actions to enforce that provision. With respect to
sections 111 and 112, section 114 appears to maintain the status quo with respect to warning
label enforcement issues. Some other proposed bills would shift that authority to FDA. The
administration is available to assist in the Committee in considering these differing approaches.
With regard to section 113, which relates to a provision of FDA law, the administration would
be pleased to assist the Committee in evaluating whether enforcement authority for the ingredient
disclosure requirements may be more appropriately vested entirely in FDA.

       2.      What changes in legislative language, if any, does the administration
               recommend regarding these provisions? Please provide specific language.

        As discussed above, the administration would be pleased to assist the Committee in
evaluating issues related to the enforcement of advertising, marketing, and labeling restrictions,
and in developing modifications, if appropriate, to legislative language.


XII.   PREEMPTION OF STATE AND LOCAL ACTION

       1.      Does the administration support such preemption? If so, why? If not, why
               not?

       2.      What changes in legislative language, if any, does the administration
               recommend regarding this provision? Please provide specific language?

       The administration generally supports the limited preemption of state and local

                                                12
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

requirements related to the packaging of cigarettes or smokeless tobacco, but does not support
the preemption of state and local restrictions on advertising. FDA's current regulations address
advertising. Although the regulations are preemptive, the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act
allows states and localities to apply for waivers to be exempted from federal thresholds. This
would allow states and localities to enact or retain existing advertising restrictions that would be
more stringent.

          The administration is available to work with the Committee with respect to the broader
issues of preemption raised by other provisions of the bill. The administration is committed to
allowing states and localities the maximum flexibility practicable to develop strong public health
policies to prevent and reduce youth tobacco use.


XIII. EXEMPTION OF EXPORTS

       1.      Does the administration support this exemption? If so, why? If not, why
not?

        No. As the world's leading exporter of tobacco products, the United States has the
obligation to guarantee that its companies will behave responsibly no matter where they do
business. There should be no exemptions for policies that would safeguard the health and well
being of people anywhere in the world.

       2.      What ramifications does this provision have in the area of foreign relations?

        Adopting a less stringent policy towards exported tobacco products would send a
negative message to the countries where these products are sold -- that the health and well being
of their citizens, particularly their children, are less important than the health and well being of
Americans.

     3.     What changes in legislative language, if any, does the administration
recommend regarding this provision? Please provide specifics.

Proposed response: The provision should be revised as follows:

·      "It shall be unlawful for any domestic concern or any officer, director, employee, or agent
       of such concern to make use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate'
       commerce to contribute, either directly or through a foreign subsidiary, joint venture,
       affiliate, or licensee to--

       "(1) the sale or distribution of tobacco products in a foreign country to children; or
       "(2) the advertising or promotion of tobacco products in a foreign country in a manner

                                                 13
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

       that appeals to children.

·      "It shall be unlawful for any domestic concern or any officer, director, employee, or agent
       of such concern either directly or through a foreign subsidiary, joint venture, affiliate, or
       licensee, to make use of the mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce
       to cause or contribute to the export from the United States any tobacco product the
       package of which does not contain a warning label that--.

       "(1) is in the primary language of the. country in which the tobacco product is sold or
       distributed to consumers; and
       "(2) except for the requirement of paragraph (1 )--
                "(A) complies with Federal requirements for labeling of similar tobacco products
       manufactured, imported, or packaged for sale or distribution in the United States;
       or
                "(B) complies with the labeling requirements of the foreign country in which the
                product is sold or distributed to consumers and which the labeling requirements
                the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines are substantially similar
                to Federal requirements and are adequately enforced by such country."

XIV.   RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS

       1.      Does the administration support these provisions? If so, why? If not, why
               not?

        The administration supports access restrictions based upon FDA's findings regarding the
ability of persons under 18 to purchase tobacco products in the absence ·of a photo identification
requirement. See, e.g., 61 Fed. Reg. 44437-39 (1996).

       2.      How does the administration envision that this provision will be enforced,
               and can it be enforced effectively?

       FDA currently is enforcing aspects of its restrictions on youth access to tobacco products
embodied in the FDA tobacco rule (21 C.F.R. §§ 897.14, 897.16). FDA is enforcing the age and
photo ID provisions cooperatively with state and local officials. Because of the enormous
number of retailers that sell tobacco, FDA has adopted a cooperative model. By way of
comparison, this is how FDA regulations are enforced for dairy farm and retail food inspections
in communities across the country-by commissioning the services of state and local officials.

        In its initial enforcement efforts, FDA contracted with 10 states. Under these contracts,
states are conducting between 200 and 330 unannounced retail compliance checks each month
over a period of eight months. Information about the compliance checks is sent to FDA, which
issues a warning for the first violation to retailers found selling to the adolescents. These

                                                14
                                                              Hex-Dump Ccnversicn
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

retailers will be subject to repeat inspections. FDA will seek a fine of $250 for the second
violation and greater fines for subsequent violations. FDA is in the process of contracting with
additional states.

         FDA anticipates that state and local contracts will provide effective mechanisms to check
compliance with other access restrictions, such as the requirement that all transactions be
face-to-face, without the assistance of any electronic device. Commissioned state and local
officials will be able to determine compliance with these and similar provisions by visiting
facilities, and appropriately documenting observations.


XV.    PROHIBITION ON SALE OF LESS THAN A FULL PACK OF CIGARETTES

       1.      Does the administration support this prohibition? If so, why? If not, why
               not?

        The administration supports this prohibition based upon FDA's findings regarding the
ability of persons under 18 to obtain cigarettes when they are sold in units of less than a full pack.
 See, e.g., 61 Fed. Reg. 44443, 44445-48.

       2.      What.change in legislative language, if any, does the administration
               recommend regarding this provision? Please provide specifics.

       The administration does not recommend any changes in the legislative language.


XVI. STATE LICENSURE TO SELL TOBACCO

       1.      What data, if any, does the administration have to indicate that licensure will
               effectively reduce access to tobacco by minors?

         Licensure of retailers will give authorities the means of identify those retailers who sell
tobacco. States that do not require licensure are having difficulty complying with the Synar
amendment, because they have difficulty identifying outlets that sell tobacco products. In
addition to providing a list of retailers, the threat oflicense revocation for noncompliance is
extremely motivating to retailers. Furthermore, license fees can be used to cover the cost of
enforcement, which is an important determinant of compliance.

       2.      What entity does the administration envision would enforce the licensure
               requirement if a state should be unable or unwilling to implement the
               licensure program?


                                                 15
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

        The administration supports a licensing program that is operated at the state or local
levels. The responsible federal agency should have authority to devise a program and set
national standards that the participating state and local programs implement.

        3.     Has the administration developed or formulated the cost of the licensure
               program? If so, why? If not, why not?

        The administration has not completed work regarding the cost of a licensure program.

        4.     Does the administration support the licensure program? If so, why? If not,
               why not? {Sentences that are bold and in italic still are proposed by DOJ
               without HHS concurrence.,

        The administration supports an effective licensing program. Federal legislation that calls
upon states to establish regulatory programs must be sensitive to federalism concerns. Section
131 would provide two incentives for states to establish licensing programs for retail
distributors of tobacco products. States that establish satisfactory licensing programs (1)
would avoid imposition of a federal ban on retail distribution of tobacco products within their
borders; and (2) would qualify for block grants under section 502. Congress possesses
authority, under principles discussed in New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 173-74
(1992), to "offer States the choice of regulating that activity according to federal standards or
having state law pre-empted by federal regulation. " Congress also possesses authority, under
Spending Clause principles discussed in South Dakota v. Dole. 483 U.S. 203 (1987), to
condition the receipt offederal funds by states on their implementation of certain regulatory
measures. Accordingly, although the section 131 incentives for state licensing may give rise
to constitutional challenges, we believe that they are consistent with the Constitution.

        5.     What changes in legislative language, if any, does the administration
               recommend regarding this provision? Please provide specifics.

       The resources of the administration are available to work with the Committee in
evaluating provisions for a licensing program.


XVII.          ANTI-TRUST EXEMPTION

        1.     Does the administration support such an .exemption? If so, why? If not,
               why not?

        The antitrust laws are the most important protector of the free-market economy against
anti competitive actions that would undermine its integrity to the detriment of consumers.
Accordingly, exceptions to the antitrust laws should be made only in exceedingly rare instances,

                                                 16
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT 2-23-98 6P_M.

when the fundamental free market values underlying the antitrust laws are compellingly
overwhelmed by a paramount policy objective; and a proposed exemption must be necessary to
permit the paramount policy objective to be pursued. The proponents of an antitrust exemption
for the tobacco industry thus face a heavy burden, which they have not yet met.

       2.      Could such an exemption be used to set prices beyond those necessary to
               deter youth smoking, but to increase profits for the industry?

         An antitrust exemption that allowed tobacco firms to set prices jointly could be used by
firms to increase prices beyond what is necessary to deter youth smoking and thereby to increase
profits at the expense of consumers. It would be very difficult to restrict use of the exemption to
its intended purpose, because the tobacco companies would have both the opportunity and the
incentive to effect unnecessary price increases and to conceal them under the guise of restrictions
on youth smoking. While the resulting collusive price increase would be likely to reduce
demand for tobacco products, it would also increase profits for the tobacco companies, at least to
the point at which they are collectively charging the "monopoly price." The tobacco companies
would thereby be able to use an antitrust exemption to enrich themselves at the expense of those
confirmed with smoking habits.


       3.      What changes in legislative language, if any, does the administration
               recommend regarding this provision? Please provide specifics.

        Before any exemption is considered for enactment, the proponents of the exemption need
to meet the burden of demonstrating that this is one of the exceedingly rare instances in which
the antitrust laws are incompatible with a clearly paramount policy objective. The
administration is extremely skeptical that the proponents of this case will be able to meet that
burden.

         Even in those rare instances in which that burden is met, any antitrust exemption should
be carefully and narrowly crafted to address that objective in the least anticompetitive manner
available. If Congress should decide to move forward with consideration of antitrust
exemptions for the tobacco industry, the administration would assist in crafting them as narrowly
and precisely as possible to achieve their purpose without creating unnecessary anticompetitive
effects.


XVIII. APPLICABILITY TO NEW ENTRANTS IN TOBACCO INDUSTRY

[Still have to work this one out.] Whatever the ultimate answer, it should make the following
point -- The inclusion of provisions that would enable new entrants to "consent" to restrictions on
their advertising would be subject to constitutional review in accord with the principles discussed

                                                17
                                     He.l:-Dump Conversion
in our answer to question 9.)




                                18
DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES

VII. GLAMORIZATION

Basil MD. The danger of cigarette "special placements" in film and television. Health
Communication 1997:9(2): 191-198.

Davies 1. The impact of the mass media upon the health of early adolescents. Journal of
Health Education 1993 SupplementS28-S35.

Mermelstein R. The CDC Tobacco Control Network: understanding factors that influence youth
tobacco use. Progress Report October 1995 - September 1997. Chicago, IL: Prevention
Research Center, University oflllinois at Chicago.

Pechmann C. Inoculation effect of tobacco counter-advertising. University of California-Irvine,
1997.

Signorielli N. Mass media images and impact on health: a sourcebook. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1993.

Terre L, Drabman R, Speer P. Health-relevant behaviors in media. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology 1991:21:1303-1319.

Thumbs Up! Thumbs Down! Teens take a look at tobacco use in the movies. American Lung
Association of Sacramento-Emigrant Trails, 1997.

Tye lB. Tobacco and youth reporter. Longmeadow, MA: Stop Teenage Addiction to Tobacco,
1990.


x.   WARNING LABELS

Borland R, Cappiello M, Hill D. Impact of the new Australian health warnings on tobacco
products. Carlton South, Victoria: Anti-Cancer Council of Victoria, 1996.

Health Canada. Effectiveness of health warning messages.    Toronto, Ontario: Tandemar
Research Inc., 1996.

Institute of Medicine. Warnings and packaging. Growing up tobacco free: preventing nicotine
addiction in children and youths. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1994:236-246.

Robinson TN, Killen JD. Do cigarette warning labels reduce smoking? Paradoxical effects

                                              19



     DRAFT 2-23-98 6P.M.

     among adolescents. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 1997; 151:267-272.

     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Warning labels on tobacco products. In
     Preventing tobacco use among young people: a report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA:
     Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1994:257-264.



                                                                      -\utomated R
                                                                      H D         ecords Management System
                                                                       ex- ump Conversion




                                                 20


