    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 24-FEB-1998 13:38:53.00

    SUBJECT:   HI-B rewrite from Labor

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Elena,

    This is the most recent version of the Labor testimony on HIB.   Ingrid has
    received comments from Defense, Office of Science & Technology Policy, and
    the National Science Foundation. Defense and OSTP were unhappy that they
    were not included in the working group.  I told Ingrid that she should
    send me their calls, and I will make sure to include them next time.

    Ingrid is faxing me the written comments on the testimony (I think the
    only written comments were from the NSF).  I will forward them to you as
    soon as I have them. Also, according to Ingrid, OSTP has long been
    opposed to the Administration's proposed reforms in this area, and wanted
    to use this opportunity to try to open up the box again.

    Julie
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP on 02/24/98
    01:44 PM ---------------------------




    INGRID M. SCHROEDER
    02/24/98 01:32:44 PM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP
    cc:
    Subject:         HI-B rewrite from Labor

    This is the Labor rewrite. OMB's comments will follow and I will fax over
    the other comments.
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Ingrid M. Schroeder/OMB/EOP on
    02/24/98 01:32 PM ---------------------------



    INGRID M. SCHROEDER
    02/24/98 10:09:38 AM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      Debra J. Bond!OMB/EOP@EOP
    cc:
    Subject:         HI-B rewrite from Labor

    According to Labor - this rewrite is based on a meeting with DPC/NEC at


2:30pm yesterday.   The changes are in redline/strikeout.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND J. UHALDE
ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR
before the
THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE

February 25, 1998


Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

        Let me begin today, Mr. Chairman, by expressing my sincere
appreciation to you for affording me this opportunity to share the views
of the Administration regarding immigration, labor market conditions in
high-technology industries, and possible reforms in the H-1B nonimmigrant
visa program. The Administration shares your interest in the information
technology industry, as evidenced by our participation in a recent
convocation in Berkeley that addressed Information Technology (IT) work
force needs.  Further, as you know from Administration proposals advanced
beginning in 1993, we believe that the H-1B program needs reform. This
employment-based visa program is seriously flawed in its current form and
urgently requires the attention of Congress.   I would like to commend the
Committee for its interest in these issues.
Tight Labor Markets and IT Skills Shortages
        It is clear that IT employment is growing rapidly, IT labor
markets are tight, and they are likely to remain so. Although this is
true for the nation as a whole, given our sustained economic expansion and
low national unemployment rate, IT labor markets appear to be particularly
affected.  Employment of computer systems analysts, engineers, and
scientists has been growing by 10% a year -- well above the growth of
comparable occupations -- and is expected to continue growing at a
comparable rate through 2006. BLS projects that the U.S. will require
more than 1.3 million new workers in IT core occupations between 1996 and
2006 to fill job openings projected to occur due to growth and the need to
replace workers who leave the labor force or transfer to other occupations.
        The IT skills shortage issue is very controversial.   Industry
advocates say that hundreds of thousands of jobs cannot be filled and that
these vacancies are hurting U.S. competitiveness. Critics say the IT
industry: (1) drastically overstates any problem by producing inflated job
vacancy data and equating it to skills shortages; (2) continues to layoff
tens of thousands of workers (e.g., AT&T recently announced large
lay-offs); and (3) fails to tap reservoirs of talent available by using
unnecessarily specific recruitment requirements and not providing more
training to current IT workers.
        One point of contention is the confusion between job vacancies and
actual skills shortages.  Even if the latest industry survey, which found
nearly 350,000 job vacancies in the IT industry is accurate, it does not
mean that there is a skills shortage of that same magnitude.   Nearly all
industries and firms, particularly those with rapid employment growth and
high worker turnover, will have large numbers of jobs openings or
vacancies without experiencing skills shortages.
        Evidence from perhaps the best predictor of skills shortages
wage growth -- does not suggest acute skills shortages nationwide in the
IT industry, but may be consistent with skills shortages in specialized
occupational areas and selected local areas.  Broad-based Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) surveys show increases in IT wages in 1996 and 1997 that
are only modestly above comparable occupations, while more specialized
industry surveys show much larger wage increases in more specialized,
high-skills occupations.



Educating and Training U.S. Workers
         The Administration believes it is essential, regardless of the magnitude
of the problem, to shape public policy to assure that IT meet the
workforce needs of the IT industry, as well as those of any other
industry, through the education and training of U.S. workers.   but that
increased immigration should be the last -- not the first -- public policy
response to skills shortages. Our first response should be to provide the
needed skills to U.S. workers to qualify them for IT jobs.   Increased
immigration should be the last -- not the first -- public policy response
to skills shortages.
        Tight labor markets and skills shortages create incentives for
employers and workers to behave in ways needed to achieve many of the
AdministrationO,s top priorities: moving welfare recipients, out-of-school
youth, and workers dislocated by trade into jobs; providing greater
opportunities for lifelong learning; and raising wages and reducing income
inequality.   Reliance on increased immigration, however, would undercut
these market incentives and adversely affect our ability to upgrade the
skills of U.S. workers to meet emerging skills shortages.
        The existence of a tight labor market causes employers to raise
wages, improve working conditions, and provide increased training to
enable currently employed workers to keep pace with technology and induce
more workers to enter the labor market.   The increased demand for trained
workers induces educational and job training institutions to teach new
skills. With more opportunities for training, workers acquire skills
needed to obtain" better, higher-paying and more secure jobs, thereby
creating open jobs and career ladders for those just entering or
reentering the labor market -- young people, welfare recipients, displaced
workers, and other disadvantaged groups.
        Labor markets are sometimes slow to respond to skills shortages.
In these circumstances, it is often argued that foreign temporary workers
are needed in the short-term to provide necessary skills while the labor
market adjusts and provides U.S. workers with the requisite training.
Without needed foreign temporary workers, some argue that the IT industry
may adjust to skills shortages in ways that do not serve the short-term or
long-term priorities of the country, either by reducing job creation or by
moving jobs overseas.   Further, it is argued that IT industries are so
critical to our competitive edge in an array of industries and services
that disproportionate harm could come to the U.S. economy.
        Even in such circumstances, however, the use of foreign temporary
workers will interfere with labor market adjustments and makes achieving
our other priorities more difficult.   It dampens the market signals of
increased wages, improved working conditions, and enhanced job security
and growth potential so that fewer U.S. workers will be induced to acquire
new skills, and fewer employers and institutions will be induced to
provide more training and education.
        Our primary public policy response to skills mismatches due to changing
technologies and economic restructuring must be to prepare the U.S.
workforce to meet new demands.    Importing needed skills should usually be
a short-term response to meet urgent needs while we actively adjust to
quickly changing circumstances.
        The Administration already has taken significant steps to increase
our capacity for increasing workforce skills.   The President continues to
pursue comprehensive reform of the NationO,s employment and training
system by working with Congress to enact the principles embodied in his GI
Bill proposal. Moreover, in the historic balanced budget agreement of
last summer, the President insisted on and achieved the largest increase
in 30 years in the Federal investment to expand the skills of American
workers, including:
         the largest Pell Grant increase in two decades -- boosting the


maximum from $2,700 to $3,000;
         a $1,500 Hope Scholarship to make the first two years of school
universally available through tax credits;
         the Lifelong Learning Tax Credit for the last 2 years of college
and continuing adult education and training to upgrade worker skills;
         a 10 percent increase in employment and training resources for
dislocated workers and disadvantaged workers and youth to over $5 billion;
and
         a $3 billion program to help move 1 million people "from welfare
to work.
         Further, the Administration announced several new efforts at the
recent Berkeley Convocation to help address the growing demand for
information technology workers:
         A Labor Department Technology Demonstration project to test
innovative ways of establishing partnerships between local workforce
development systems, employers, training providers and others to train
dislocated workers in needed high tech skills;
         The expansion and integration of AmericaO,s Job Bank and
AmericaO,s Talent Bank by the Labor Department to allow employers and
workers to list and access job openings and worker resumes in one
integrated system.
A Commerce Department grant program to bring information technology to
low-income persons, particularly to enhance education and life-long
learning;
The convening of four town hall meetings by the Commerce Department to
discuss IT workforce needs, identify best practices, and showcase
successful models; and
A joint Education and Labor grant program to expand employer involvement
in high technology school-to-work programs.
         We think that there is more that we can do to move U.S. workers
into high technology jobs, and we welcome the discussions that may be
sparked by this hearing.   We are committed to pursuing a continued
dialogue with the major stakeholders in the IT workforce issue --
government, industry, workers, and education and training institutions
to better define the workforce needs of the IT industry and develop appropr
iate solutions to meet these needs involving commitments from each of the
stakeholders. Such a dialogue is critical because increased immigration,
if needed, can be only a small part 9f the solution to the workforce needs
of the IT industry.
         Given this broader contex~, let me turn to the need for reform of
the H-1B nonimmigrant program.
 H-1B Nonimmigrant Program
         The H-1B program allows the admission of up to 65,000 workers each
year (to stay for as long as six years), ostensibly to meet short-term,
high-skills employment needs in the domestic labor market.    In principle,
this can be an appropriate purpose, consistent with our overall goal of
giving priority to improving the skills of U.S. workers.
         In practice, however, employers do not have to demonstrate any
type of employment need or domestic recruitment prior to getting a foreign
worker.   Exacerbating this problem, the Labor Department is limited
strictly in its ability to enforce the minimum standards that employers
must adhere to.    Employers obtain H-1B foreign workers by filing a labor
condition application with the Department affirming that they have
complied with four requirements:
         that a wage (not less than the local prevailing rate) will be
paid to the foreign workers;
         that no strike or lockout exists;
         that notification has been provided to U.S. workers and their
unions; and
         that the employment of H-1B nonimmigrants will not adversely
·
      affect the working conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.
      By law, the Labor Department can do no more than review these attestations
      for completeness and obvious inaccuracies -- to determine whether an
      employer checked all of the boxes, made no flagrant errors, and signed the
      attestation. Once the Department has reviewed the attestation, its
      enforcement has been limited by the fact that foreign worker is unlikely
      to make a complaint.
               Our experience with the practical operation of the H-1B program
      has raised serious concerns that what was conceived as a means to meet
      temporary business needs for unique, highly-skilled professionals from
      abroad is, in fact, being used for a totally different purpose.    Some
      employers -- though a minority of those who use the H-1B program -- seek
      admission of foreign workers to compete with qualified U.S. workers
      because temporary foreign workers are tied to one employer and are likely
      to be willing to work for lower wages and under less favorable working
      conditions. As a result, relatively large numbers of foreign workers who
      may well be displacing U.S. workers and eroding employers' commitment to
      the domestic workforce.
               Many employers, to be sure, use the H-1B nonimmigrant program for
      its stated purpose: to provide U.S. businesses with timely access to the
      "best and the brightest" in the international labor market to meet urgent
      but generally temporary business needs.   I want to emphasize that the
      Administration recognizes the need for this legitimate use of the
      program. But reform of the H-1B program is needed because it does not
      provide the needed balance between timely access to the international
      labor market and adequate protection of U.S. workers' job opportunities,
      wages and working conditions.
               Greater protections for U.S. workers are needed because many
      employers use the H-IB program to employ not the O&best and the
      brightest,OB but rather entry-level foreign workers who compete with U.S.
      workers.   Minimum education and work experience qualifications for H-1B
      jobs are quite low. -- a 4-year college degree and no work experience, or
      the equivalent in terms of combined education and work experience.    Thus,
      a foreign worker with the equivalent of a community college degree and a
      few years of experience can compete with U.S. workers.   These low
      educational requirements result in nearly 80 percent of H-1B jobs paying
      less than $50,000 a year and more than 70 percent of the jobs being in
      computer-related occupations, physical therapists, and other healt
      h-related occupations.
               The H-1B program is broken in several respects.  First, current
      law does not require any test for the availability of qualified U.S.
      workers in the domestic labor market. Therefore, many of the visas under
      the current cap of 65,000 can be used lawfully by employers to hire
      foreign workers for purposes other than meeting a skills shortage.
      Second, current law allows a U.S. employer to layoff U.S. workers and
      replace them with H-1B workers. Third, current law allows employers to
      retain H-IB workers for up to 6 years to fill a presumably O&temporaryOB
      need.  We simply do not believe this is right.   The H-1B program does
      almost nothing to encourage U.S. employers to develop U.S. workers to
      perform the jobs for which they are seeking nonimmigrants, or to limit
      their dependency on a nonimmigrant workforce.
               As a result of these weaknesses in the program, it has become
      increasingly evident that the H-1B program is being utilized by some as
      the basis for building businesses dependent on the labors of foreign
      workers in relatively low-level computer-related and health care
    . occupations. This is a clear example of companies using H-1B visas for
      foreign workers that are not needed to meet skills shortages. Such
      businesses are, in some cases, in unfair competition with U.S. workers and
      those U.S. businesses. that employ mostly U.S. workers.  The existence of
      "job contractors" with work forces composed predominantly or even entirely
·
    of H-1B workers, which then. lease these employees to other u.s. companies
    or use them to provide services previously provided by laid off U.S.
    workers, is cause for serious concern.
            Mr. Chairman, the Administration asked the Congress in 1995 to
    amend the H-1B nonimmigrant program to address these problems.
    Unfortunately for many u.s. businesses and workers, these amendments were
    not enacted.   The amendments requested in 1995 were carefully designed to
    assure continued business access to needed high-skills workers in the
    international labor market while decreasing the H-1B program's
    susceptibility to misuse to the detriment of u.s. workers and the
    businesses which employ them. Briefly stated, the amendments would
    require employers which seek access to temporary foreign "professional"
    workers to attest that:
                      they have not laid off or otherwise displaced u.s.
    workers in the occupations for which they seek nonimmigrant workers in the
    periods preceding and following their seeking such workers; and,
                     in certain circumstances, they have taken timely and
    significant steps to recruit and retain u.s. workers in these occupations.
    In addition, the Administration urged enactment of another amendment to
    reduce the allowable period of stay under the H-1B program from six to
    three years to better reflect the "temporary" nature of the presumed
    employment need.
            Enactment of these amendments will help employers actually facing
    skills shortages, including those in the IT industry, obtain needed
    workers through the H-1B program. Under existing program rules, employers
    facing skills shortages are disadvantaged because they must compete for
    available visas (up to the cap of 65,000) on a first-come, first-served
    basis with other employers that do not face such shortages.   Enactment of
    the proposed amendments would reduce pressure on the visa cap by screening
    out employers that are not faced with skills shortages and have no
    interest in recruiting u.s. workers.
            A significant number of such employers use the H-1B program as a
    probationary program for foreign students who graduate from u.s. colleges,
    without a market test for u.s. workers, to determine if they want to
    sponsor the foreign student for permanent immigration status.   By reducing
    the use of the H-1B for such purposes, more visas would be available for
    employers who need to use the H-1B program for its original purpose --
    bringing in foreign workers to fill a temporary, critical need that
    cannot be met by U. S·. workers.
     Conclusion
            Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by restating that the workforce needs of
    the IT industry can only be met if we take the steps needed to fully
    develop and utilize the skills of U.S. workers.   Increased immigration can
    only be a very small part of the solution and must be viewed as a minor co
    mplement to the development of the u.s. workforce.   Further, let me repeat
    ing that reform of the H-1B program is integral and essential to
    eliminating abuses under the program and providing greater protections for
    U.S. workers. At a bare minimum, we must not expand a program as
    fundamentally flawed as the H-1B nonimmigrant visa program.   Further,
    enactment of these reforms would effectively allocate a greater share of
    H-1B visas to employers facing actual skills shortages.
            I appreciate the interest shown by the Committee Members and staff
    in our views, and your thoughtful consideration of them.   The Department
    looks forward to continuing to work closely and cooperatively with you and
    your staff on these issues. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared
    statement.


·


