 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME:25-FEB-1998 09:49:27.00

 SUBJECT:    meeting with Clay

TO: Elena Kagan         CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP       [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Should have copied you last night.

The discussion about national testing was particularly depressing,
especially after I thought about it over night.

Clay appears to believe that, given the family circumstances many poor and
minority kids face, that either the kids truly can't learn, or the
schools are so bad that they can't be trusted to teach them. Remarkably
enough, this was the prevailing view in the late 60's and 70's--that
family background made all the difference for student achievement, and
that there was nothing schools could do to overcome the disadvantages of
poverty. We've got almost two decades of good solid research that proves
that "Wrong, but Clay doesn't appear to buy it. If only he realized that
in the past the view that "schools don't make a difference" was the reason
people used for not investing in them.
---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP on 02/25/98
09:43 AM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
02/24/98 06:12:09 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Janet Murguia/WHO/EOP
cc:
subject:         meeting with Clay

As we discussed, Riley, Scott Fleming and I met with Clay this afternoon.
Here's what happened:

1. National Tests: Riley started by thanking Clay for his help on the
Goodling vote (and hoped to move on to other issues right away).    Clay
wanted to talk about the tests, to make sure we understood that no one had
changed their positions. Riley suggested to Clay that he put together a
testing bill that the CBC and CHC could support; Clay didn't say this
directly, but his response (about the kind of resources and help poor kids
need) suggested that he couldn't think of any version of a national
testing b·ill that the caucuses would support.. Clay was not overly
impressed with our proposed historic increase in K-12 furiding, and was
unmoved by the argument that smaller classes, modern buildings, reading
tutors, well trained teachers, High Hopes mentors and other $ targeted to
high poverty communities would help kids learn to read--at least not moved
enough to think we should test the kids to find out if they could read.



It was useful to have the conversation, and of course we agreed to keep
working with each other.  I actually thought it was a tactical error to
ask Clay to take the lead on this; we would be better off with our
strategy of getting George Miller to put together a testing bill that the
caucuses won't flat out oppose.  I've asked Scott Fleming to set up a
meeting with Miller or his staff on this.

2. HSI's/HBCU's.· Clay brought this one up--he asked Riley what he
thought of Clay's compromise proposal (I don't ~now the details of this
one). Riley told him he liked it, but when Clay pushed for his support,
Riley said he supported Clay's proposal and the CHC proposal--we just
wanted them to work this one out, because we all agree that we don't want
an open fight on this.  Clay was adament that there would be no Republican
support, and no non-CHC support on his committee for the CHC position.
He's apparantly met several times with CHC members, indicated that
Becerra and others thought the Clay proposal was a good idea, and that
Hinajosa was the only one blocking an agreement.

We didn't do much more than indicate that it would be really great if they
could work this one out.

3. Education Opportunity Zones. We discussed these briefly, and gave
Clay and his staff a copy of the spec's we've developed. We will meet
with them in the next few days to go over substance.   In our brief
conversation on this topic, I ticked off a handful of his ideas we
incorporated in our bill, indicated that we wanted to use as much as
possible from his bill last year, hoped that he would be interested in our
ideas so he could take the lead on this bill. Given the conversation we
had just had on testing, I didn't th'ink it was a good time to seek his
views on ending social promotions.


Otherwise, it was a great meeting.


