RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton!OU=OMB!O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE!TIME:25-FEB-1998 10:05:22.00

 SUBJECT:    LABOR Report on HR2888 Sales Incentive Compensation Act

 TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deborah@6=Clifton@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deb
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: AliceE. Shuffield ( CN=Alice E. Shuffield!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!o'U=OPD!O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: clrm ( clrm @ doc.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano!OU=WHO!O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Debra J. Bond ( CN=Debra J. Bond!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Total Pages: ____


 LRM ID: MNB106
 EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
 OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
 Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

 Tuesday, February 24, 1998

 LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

 TO:                       Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

 FROM:             Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
 Reference
 OMB CONTACT:      Melissa N. Benton
                                   PHONE: (202)395-7887 FAX: (202)395'-6148
 SUBJECT:          LABOR Report on HR2888 Sales Incentive Compensation Act

 DEADLINE:                 COB    Thursday, February 26, 1998

 In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
 agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the


program of the President,  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990,

COMMENTS: The introduced bill follows the draft letter.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
61-JUSTICE - Andrew Fois - (202) 514-2141
76-National Economic Council - Sonyia Matthews - (202) 456-6630

 EOP:
 Barry White
 Larry R. Matlack
 Debra J. Bond
 Elena Kagan
 Kar.en Tramontano
 OMB LA
 Janet R. Forsgren
.LRM ID: MNBI06 SUBJECT:   LABOR Report on HR2888 Sales Incentive
 Compensation Act


RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:             Melissa N. Benton Phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                Office of Management and Budget
                Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                          (Name)

                                                          (Agency)

                                                          (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

               Concur


               No Objection

               No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

               Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet




The Honorable Robert E. Andrews
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington,  D. C.  20515

Dear Congressman Andrews:

I am pleased to iespond to your request for the Department of LaborO,s
views on H.R. 2888, the O&Sales Incentive Compensation Act, 0& which
would amend the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) by providing a minimum
wage and overtime exemption to all sales people who meet certain criteria.

H.R. 2888 has no provision requiring additional compensation for sales
employees who may be forced to work long hours.  This would deny FLSA
protection for significant numbers of often low-paid workers who have long
received such protection.  The DepartmentO,s opinion that expansion of
the FLSA 0&sales08 exemptions would seriously erode one of the most basic
principles of the FLSA      to limit excessive hours of work by employees
and provide them just compensation for working beyond 40 hours in a week
    remains unchanged.

You indicate that H.R. 2888 incorporates several important worker
protections and guarantees, and in this regard we agree that the bill
represents an improvement over previous bills. with such purpose. Our
careful review of the proposal, however,  raises several concerns
regarding these protections, including:

The overall design of the expanded exemption clearly shifts business risk
from employers to employees. Employees who work long hours but are
unable, for whatever reason, to make significant sales will receive little
or no additional pay for the extra hours they work. The employer can not
lose in this situation, but the employees certainly will.

The requirement that the exempt O&employeeO,s position requires
specialized or technical knowledge related to products or services being
sold ,0& whether further defined by regulation or in the legislative
history, is so vague and subject to differences in understanding and
application that there will undoubtedly be an increase in the already high
levels of private litigation involving sales employment.

Determining when and how this complicated, multi-test exemption applies
will be very difficult for employers, employees and the Department of
Labor. This difficulty too will undoubtedly lead to misunderstandings,
disputes and litigation.

Proper application of the exemption will require employers to maintain
extensive and complicated records, potentially including:  (1) the


specialized or technical knowledge required to sell, each product and/or
service;   (2) the amount and timing of training provided to each
salesperson on each product and/or service;    (3) the identity of each
customer contacted by each salesperson and whether the salesperson had an
established relationship with that customer or an indication that the
salesperson did not initiate sales contacts;    (4) the amount of
incentive-based compensation received by each salesperson relative to
their required base pay during the base period; and (5) the rate of
incentive-based compensation paid to each salesperson for each sale after
the 40% of base pay incentive-based compensation requirement has been met.

For these reasons, the Department opposes expansion of the FLSA O&sale q 08
exemptions to sales employees in all industries.  Thank you for soliciting
and considering our views on this important worker protection issue.   The
Office of Management and BUdget has advised that there is no objection to
the presentation of this report from the standpoint of the
AdministrationO,s program.


Sincerely


Bernard Anderson
Sales Incentive Compensation Act (Introduced in the House)

HR 2888 IH

                              105th CONGRESS

                                  1st Session

                                  H. R. 2888.

To amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exempt from the minimum
wage recordkeeping
and overtime compensation requirements certain specialized employees.

                     IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                             November 7, 1997

Mr. FAWELL (for himself and Mr. ANDREWS) introduced the following bill;
which was referred
to the Committee on Education and the Workforce



                                   A BILL

To amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to exempt from the minimum
wage recordkeeping
and overtime compensation requirements certain specialized employees.

     Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of
     America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

     This Act may be cited as the 'Sales Incentive Compensation Act'.



 SEC. 2. EXEMPTION.

       Section 13(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C.
 213 (a»   is amended by
       striking the period at the end of paragraph (17) and inserting a
 semicolon and by adding at the
       end the following:

           -(18) any employee employed in a sales position if--

                -(A) the employee's position requires specialized or
 technical knowledge related
                to products or services being sold;

                -(B) the employee's sales are predominantly to persons or
 entities to whom the
                employee has made previous sales or the employee's position
 does not involve
                initiating sales contacts;

                   -(C) the employee receives--

                         -(i) base compensation, determined without regard to
 the number of hours
                         worked by the employee, of not less than an amount
 equal to 1 1/2 times
                         the minimum wage multiplied by 2,080; and

                         -(ii)   in addition to the employee's base compensation,
 compensation
                         based upon each sale attributable to the employee;

                   -(D) the employee's aggregate compensation based upon sales
 attributable to
                the employee is not less than 40 percent of the amount
 specified in subparagraph
                   (C) (i) ;

                   -(E) the employee receives a rate of compensation based
 upon each sale
                   attributable to the employee which is beyond sales required
 to reach the
                 compensation required by subparagraph (D) which rate is not
 less than the rate
                 on which the compensation required by subparagraph (D) is
 determined; and

                -(F) the rate of annual compensation or base compensation
 for any employee
                who did not work for an employer for an entire calendar
 year is prorated to
                reflect annual compensation which would have been earned if
 the employee had
                been compensated at the same rate for the entire calendar
 year. ' .

                                                                                    ,


