RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Steven M. Mertens { CN=Steven M. Mertens/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-FEB-1998 18:28:44.00

 SUBJECT:   Re: White House Immigration Working Group

TO: Elena Kagan { CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Steven M. Mertens/OMB/EOP on 02/25/98
06:28 PM ---------------------------



 Steven M. Mertens

 02/25/98 06:19:59 PM
 Record Type:    Record

To:      Michael Deich/OMB/EOP@EOP, Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP@EO
cc:      Julie A.Fernandes/OPD/EOP@EOP, Kenneth L. Schwartz/OMB/EOP@EOP, David
J. Haun/OMB/EOP@EOP
Subject:         Re: White House Immigration Working Group

 Booz sent over a rough draft of the report last Friday night.  Julie
 Fernandez and I meet with Booz, Justice, the Commissioner and INS staff
 for four hours this morning to discuss the draft findings and what the
 INS/Administration want from Booz as a final report.  The meeting was
 constructive and we will meet with this Senior Policy Board again tomorrow
 afternoon to continue the discussion.

  Booz has spent considerable time "drilling down" to what a possible local
 office -- enforcement and services -- would look like (this was an INS
 request to ensure that the enforcement/services split is workable). This
 made up most of today's briefing.  INS is still kicking with muted
 screaming about the service/enforcement split from headquarters to the
 field.  They kept focusing on the need for integration and at what levels
 integration needed to be accomplished. Booz has been very good at
 defending the functional split rationale and stressing that integration
 can be accomplished through process and technology NOT organizational
 structure and reporting relationship.

 Julie and I have one organizational problem with the Booz package and a
 presentation question we would like your guidance on prior to the meeting
 tomorrow:

Organization -- The draft organization Booz has drawn up establishes an
"enforcement operations," "service operations" and "shared services"
organization under a Commissioner.  The shared services. function would
include all the administrative functions (personnel, information resources
management, etc.).  I told INS and Booz that we .believed the
administrative support function should be a staff responsibility reporting
to the Commissioner (this is how it was portrayed on the ·strawman).  From
an optics point of view we wanted the INS restructuring to focus on the
mission driven operations of enforcement and services -- with no other
subagency head of comparable stature. We also need. to address the role of
HQ administrative services since the success of the operational components


depends on competent execution (some administrative operations such as IRM
might be better placed under operations with admin services providing R&D
and ensuring consistency across the agency -- this was the thrust of the
strawman). Booz, on Monday agreed with me, but today indicated that their
organizational proposal was similar to the corporate world and it would be
their recommendation.

If you agree, Julie and I will raise this issue again tomorrow and seek
this change. We would tell INSjBooz that as a policy issue DPCjOMB
believe a restructured INS should focus on an enforcement and services
split as the preeminent sub-commissioner functional breakout with shared
or administrative services reporting to the commissioner as a staff
support function.

Presentation -- The detail of the Booz product or report will be the
focus of the discussion tomorrow.  The draft shared with. us (and which we
will share with you) was 50+ pages of charts and graphs showing how Booz
arrived at this organizational structure and briefing explaining how it
would work.  They planned to develop a 10-20 page executive summary and
append the charts as their final product.   There was discussion of the
proper level of detail we should provide to Congress by April 1 and
questions about whether an executive summary document with a minimum
number of charts and milestones for implementation should serve as the
Booz report.  The concern was whether providing too much documentation
(and detailed organizational proposal that had not been fully developed at
this stage of the process) may open the Administration up to Congressional
criticism. We were leaning towards a more minimalist approach -- an
executive summary document that explains 'the Administration's proposal,
specifically address Congressional concerns (performance measures related
to lines-of-authority, consistency, professionalism and accountability)
and a milestone chart showing how the INS planned to move from its current
organizational structure to the restructured entity.

Do you have a preference on the final report format -- Executive Summary
or Executive Summary plus appendices?

DOJ plans to extend the Booz contract until March 10th.so they can
complete this effort. A revised draft report (one of the options above)
will be recirculate either Friday or Monday.

Julie and I will keep you posted on the outcome of the meeting tomorrow.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please contact
either of us.  Thanks.


