       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ] )

       CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1998 20:01:54.00

       SUBJECT:   FYI. International Tobacco Press Conference

       TO: Jerold R. Mande ( CN;Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O;EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ]
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN;Mary L. Smith/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Senators Propose IntI Restrictions [02/26-5]

       A group of senators, including New Jersey Sen. Frank Lautenberg and Sen.
       Dick Durbin of Illinois,
       have released plans to control tobacco use worldwide.

       Here is an official summary:

       A Responsible U.S. Policy To Address International Tobacco Use
       and Promote Global Public Health

        Tobacco use is a growing threat to global public health. Today, tobacco
        products account for three
        million deaths worldwide each year; by 2025, that number is expected to
        rise to ten million per year,   .
       .with over 70 percent of tobacco-related deaths occurring in developing
        nations.

       As the world9s leading exporter of tobacco products, the United States has
       a moral responsibility to
       address the adverse impact of its products on global public health. As a
       part of any effort to address
       tobacco use, Congress should establish a responsible international health
       policy by enacting these
       five proposals:

       1. End U.S. Government Support for Tobacco Abroad. The federal government
       should be
       prohibited from promoting the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco
       products abroad. It should also
       be prohibited from attempting to weaken a foreign tobacco regulation unle
       ss the regulation
       discriminates against U.S. products in an arbitrary and unjustifiable
       manner and is not a reasonable
       means of protecting public health.
'.
       2. Adequately Fund Global Non-governmental Tobacco Control Efforts, A
       private, nonprofit
       organization should be established to assist public health organizations
       in other countries through
       public education programs, technical assistance to health professionals,
       mass media campaigns,
       grants and other general assistance.

       3. Establish a Code of Conduct for Labeling and Advertising Overseas. U.S.
       tobacco companies
       should be required to print health warning labels on tobacco products sold
       overseas that are as
       stringent as those' required in the. United States. U.S. tobacco companies
       should also be prohibited
       from selling, advertising or marketing tobacco products to' children in
       other countries, with the same
       standards applied to their overseas conduct as at home.

       4. Stop International Tobacco Smuggling. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
       and Firearms, which
       currently regulates alcohol smuggling, should be given authority to deter
       tobacco smuggling through,
       among other things, a system of export permits and increased record
       keeping.

       5. Fund International Tobacco Control Through a Tobacco Control Fee. Every
       U.S. tobacco
       company should pay a two-cent fee for each package of cigarettes it sells
       overseas. The money
       raised through such a fee should be used for tobacco control efforts by go
       vernmental and
       non-governmental entities.

       The United States has the opportunity to act as a world leader in
       promoting public health. If
       congress passes any measure to confront domestic tobacco use, it must also
       tackle the health
       problems caused by the use of American tobacco products abroad. We st
       rongly endorse these
       proposals to establish a responsible U.S. policy for the promotion of
       global public health.


