      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:10-MAR-1998 11:22:41.00

      SUBJECT:   NEXT TWO WEEKS

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      I thought you might find this summary of upcoming education-related
      activity on the hill useful.  Please note that, near the end of the
      message, they are asking for some guidance on tobacco-related issues.  In
      particular, what should they know--and what should they do with respect to
      class size--for the tobacco legislation Jeffords will be taking up later
      this week?
      ---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP on 03/10/98
      11:19 AM ---------------------------



              Susan_Frost @ ed.gov (Susan Frost)
              03/09/98 11:29:15 PM
      Record Type: 'Record

      To: Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP, Robert M. Shireman/OPD/EOP
      cc:
      Subject: NEXT TWO WEEKS




      fyi ..... susan

                                       Forward Header

      Subject: NEXT TWO WEEKS
      Author:  Susan Frost at Wdcb04
      Date:    3/9/98 11:25 PM


           FOR INTERNAL DISCUSSION ONLY!!!
           Just to recap what we were told today at our hill meetings ---issues
           that are coming up on the hill in the next two weeks that will need
           immediate and ongoing attention ..... and initial efforts to address
           those issues ...

           SENATE WILL TAKE UP COVERDELL WEEK OF MARCH 16TH ----- DEMOCRATS WILL
           OFFER SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION AS SUBSTITUTE

           Secretary Riley met with Senator Daschle last week and agreed that the
           best way to defeat proposals like Coverdell is to offer an alternative
           that really forces a choice between our education agenda and theirs.
           Senator Mosely-Braun will offer the Administration's School
           Construction legislation as a substitute for the Coverdell IRA


    expansion for private school tuition and other educational expenses.
    The Senate will take up Coverdell next week and the vote on the
    substitute will probably be Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday. This is
    the first big floor vote on the President's education initiatives this
    year and we are putting maximum effort behind it.

    Daschle's whip count today told us that almost all Democrats will vote
    for the substitute (Lieberman and Toricelli may be the exceptions) .
    But we are have only begun to work this vote!!! We are urging the
    entire Senate to vote for this proposal --- recent bipartisan polls
    found solid support for school· construction from Democrats and
    Republicans across the country.   If the substitute fails, however, we
    are strongly urging Members to vote against cloture on Coverdell. AND
    we expect school construction to be offered on other moving bills
    until we have the votes to pass it.

    There are currently 43 organizations that have endorsed the
    President's school construction bill ..... and more are coming in. (We
    have the list if you need it.) The Secretary met with the major k-12
    edcuation groups on Thursday on this issue. At least three of those
    groups have conferences in town next week --- Elementary and Secondary
    School Principals, Chief State School Officers (Secretary speaks to
    them Sunday) and TRIO directors.   Please let me know if any of you or
    your staff are speaking at these conferences.

    We expect this week and next to be very important in getting our
    message out. We have summaries of our school construction proposal
    including state and city-by-city allocations and other information if
    you need it. We are also working on a comparison of the two proposals
    --- Coverdell VS School Construction --- showing how many more
    children and families would benefit from modernized schools vs another
    IRA expansion.

    We expect the President to highlight this issue at the education TIMSS
    event he is doing at the White. House on Monday morning.  The Vice
    President is doing a School Construction event on Friday the 20th in
    Congresswoman Sanchez's district in CA.   The Secretary or the VP may
    be speaking to the principals conference. Other events are in the
    works. There are plans for a tentative press conference by the
    Secretary and others on Tuesday.   Any ideas you have, please let us
    know.

    We are beginning to plan the school construction regional forums the
    VP announced a few weeks ago.  May take place April 6th or 8th. These
    would be followed by a major event in September on the Schools of the
    21st Century. We meet this week with the groups that are interested
    in helping to set up these events.

    HOUSE MARK-UP OF HEA REAUTHORIZATION

    The House Subcommittee marked up the HEA reauthorization bill last
    week and expects to go to full committee March 18th. Two of the main
    titles ----Title IV Student Aid and Title V Teacher Professional
    Development were not included and will be added at full committee. We
    are working with the Democrats on the committee to get two of our new
    initiatives --- Lighthouse Partnerships/Teacher Recruitment and High
    Hopes added at full committee. We have much work to do on both
    including getting High Hope legislation to the hill before they will
    consider it! We have set up a meeting on Friday with the Secretary
    and key CEOs of groups to discuss our Title V and High Hopes


      proposals.

      A major controversial issue is the student loan interest rates --- the
      Administration has made a proposal that would protect students and
      maintain the program. We are waiting to see what the committee's
      proposal will be.  It is not clear where the higher ed institutions
      and/or the students will be on competing proposals or if they will
      come up with their own. Democrats are urging them to do the later.
      If committee comes in "too high", Clay and Kildee will offer an
      amendment to drive the rate down (undefined amount) .

      At this moment, the committee expects to keep the interest rate issue
      tied to the reauthor~zation bill rather than moving it separately.
      The Senate wants to do the same.  This will all depend on how fast
      they can move these bills since the interest rate deadline is July 1.
      Both the Senate and House committees have a promise of floor time from
      their leaderships if they can move their bills this spring.
      Conference would be in June.

      WORKFORCE BILL ---- it may happen!!! Senate is close to agreement
      from all sides on moving their bill to the floor next week (could
      bring it up right before Coverdell). Trish/Jon      news on this?

      THE FY 1999 BUDGET RESOLUTION ---- TAX, TOBACCO and Education Funds
The
      Senate will move the Congressional Budget Resolution for FY1999 in the
      Budget· Committee Wednesday and Thursday. We expect a Freeze at last
      year's level for Function 500 (education and training) in the
      Chairman's mark.   Senator Murray is planning to offer an amendment to
      increase the mark to the President's level for education plus a
      substantial amount for IDEA. Good message amendment and can be offere
d
      again on the Senate floor.

      The Chairman's mark is expected to include a reserve fund for future
      tax legislation that may be broad enough to accommodate school
      construction (although they will list specifics). Chairman Domenici
      will also offer a Tobacco reserve fund for future legislation but will
      probably designate the proceeds for Medicare.   Senator Murray is
      talking about offering an amendment for childcare and class size.
      However, Democrats are not unified on this one.   Several Democrats
      have said they only want health related issues to be paid for with
      Tobacco legislation. Others are concerned that Class Size and
      Childcare will have to compete 'for funding.  Doesn't look like a clear
      message developing here.

      Meanwhile, we understand that more than one committee will move
      tobacco legislation this week and next.  Senator Jeffords plans to
      move legislation in Labor Committee on Wednesday.  Senator Conrad
      already has a proposal out there.  Others are in the offing.  This is
      all getting very confusing --- we have asked Mike Cohen for White
      House guidance on all of this. (DPC is in charge of Tobacco and Class
      Size!! )

      THESE ARE THE ISSUES WE KNOW WILL NEED FOCUS BY ALL OF US IN THE NEXT
      TWO WEEKS --- Comments, questions, additional information, corrections
      are all welcome!!!
"




                                     o
,.

