RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-MAR-1998 19:22:25.00

SUBJECT:   Education weekly--for real

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Single-sex schools.   This week the American Association of University
Women released a report on single-sex education.    The study, an extensive
review of previous studies,   found no overall evidence that single-sex
education is better for girls than coeducation.    Instead, the AAUW
reported that educational factors such as high standards, smaller classes
and a challenging curriculum were essential for the academic success for
all young women.    Secretary Riley released a statement noting that the
report found that high standards and a challenging curriculum were
essential for academic success for all young women and stating that the
Department remains committed to public school choice and maximum
flexibility, as allowed within the law.   ED is otherwise declining to
comment on the report until it has had the opportunity to fully review it.

This study is important in light of the ongoing discussions with NYC
regarding the all-girls Young WomenO,s Leadership Academy.   This school
has been the subject of a civil rights complaint from the ACLU, filed with
the Education DepartmentO,s Office of Civil Rights.   Next week, the
Education Department will be holding its second meeting with the NYC
chancellor's office in an attempt to reach agreement over how the best to
keep the school open within the constraints of the law. The joint ED/NYC
team is working to develop the information that would support a remedial
rationale for keeping the school open. We have urged the Education
Department to bring· this matter to a successful close as soon as possible,
and expect to have a timetable for accomplishing this as a result of the
upcoming meeting.

TIMSS Roundtable Meeting. On Monday you will be meeting with 25
government, education math and science, and business leaders at
Springbrook High School in Silver Spring Maryland to hear a range of ideas
for how to improve math and science achievement in the wake of the
recently announced TIMSS results. Among the participants are Govs.
Glendening and Underwood, Mayors Daley, Riordan and Lee Clancey (Cedar
Rapids IA), Sandy Feldman and Bob Chase, Bill Nye O&the Science Guy08 from
the PBS show, Diane Ravitch, and NYC schools chancellor Rudy Crew.
Secretary Riley and Secretary Pena are also participating.   This event
will provide an opportunity for you to highlight your overall K-12
education agenda including national standards and tests, smaller class
sizes, school modernization, mentors and reading tutors and ending social
promotions.  It will also provide an opportunity to challenge others to do
their part as well: more students to take more challenging academic
courses, new teachers to pass tough tests of subject matter competency,
and parents to demand tougher standards and tests so they know if their
children are measuring up.


