RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William H. White Jr.   ( CN=william H. White Jr./OU=WHO/O=EOP ,[ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-MAR-1998 08:46:41.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Press Statement

TO: Joshua Silverman ( CN=Joshua Silverman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
PRESIDENT CLINTON SIGNS EXECUTIVE ORDER ESTABLISHING
NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON EMPLOYMENT OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


The President today signed an Executive Order establishing a National
Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabil'ities that will create
a c00rdinated and aggressive national policy to bring working-age
individuals with disabilities into gainful employment at a rate
approximating that of the general adult population.

"Since 1993, we have created 15 million new jobs.  But the unemployment
rate among people with disabilities is far too high, and that is why I'm
so pleased
to sign today an executive order that wi~l design a strategy to make
equality of opportunity, full participation, inclusion, and economic
self-sufficiency realities for all 30 million working-age Americans
with disabilities," ~eclared President Clinton.

Charged with developing and recommending to the President a federal
policy to reduce employment barriers for persons with disabilities,
the Task Force will submit four reports, the first by November 15,
1998, and the last on July 26, 2002, the 10th anniversary of the
initial implementation of the employment provisions of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.  Alexis M. Herman, Secretary of Labor, will
Chair the Task Force.  Tony Coelho, Chairman of the President's
Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities, will serve as
Vice-Chair.

Policy recommendations are expected to address such areas of
widespread concern as discrimination, accommodations; access to health
care; consumer-driven, long-term supports and services;
transportation; accessible and integrated housing; telecommunications;
assistive technology; community services; child care; education;
vocational rehabilitation; training services; job retention;
on-the-job supports; and economic incentives to work.

Key components of the Task Force's directive include analyzing
existing programs and policies to determine what changes,
modifications and innovations may be necessary to remove barriers to
work; developing and recommending options to address the barrier of
health insurance coverage; analyzing youth programs related to
employment and the outcomes of those programs for young people with
disabilities; and evaluating whether federal studies related to
employment and training can and should include a statistically
significant sample of adults with disabilities.
'.
     The Task Force also will include the Secretary of Education; the
     Secretary of Veterans Affairs; the Secretary of Health and Human
     Services; the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration; the
     Secretary of the Treasury; the Secretary of Commerce; the Secretary of
     Transportation; the Administrator of the Small Business
     Administration; the Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity
     Commission; the Director of the Office of Personnel Management,
     and the Chair of the National Council on Disability.
     These officials are required to make the activities and
     initiatives of this Executive Order a high priority
     within their respective agencies.


                                                         -   30 -


