         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Ingrid M. Schroeder ( CN=Ingrid M. Schroeder/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB ] )

         CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-MAR-1998 13:13:57.00

         SUBJECT:   LRM #MJG192 - Statement of Administration Policy on HR2294 Federal Courts


         TO: silasadr ( silasadr @ justice.usdoj.gov     @ inet [ UNKNOWN]   )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@3=GOV+TREAS@5=DO@4=MS01@7=LLR@6=TREASURY@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEM
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Alice E. Shuffield ( CN=Alice E. Shuffield/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: Thomas P. Stack ( CN=Thomas P. Stack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ]       )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: Pamula L. Simms ( CN=Pamula L. Simms/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ]       )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: Jose Cerda III    ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Ellen J. Balis ( CN=Ellen J. Balis/OU'=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB,]    )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Douglas D. McCormick ( CN=Douglas D. McCormick!OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ]        )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Steven D. Aitken ( CN=Steven D. Aitken!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@5=OPMMAC@7=Charlie@6=OPMOLA@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEMAIL@5=OPMMAC@
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: bricks ( bricks   @   osdgc.osd.mi1 [ UNKNOWN]   )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
         READ:UNKNOWN

         TO: Catherine A. Poynton ( CN=Catherine A. Poynton!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ]        )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Kenneth S. Kelly ( CN=Kenneth S. Kelly!OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Peter G. Jacoby ( CN=Peter G. Jacoby!OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]        )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: William P. Marshall     ( CN=william P. Marshall!OU=WHO!O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]   )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Beverly B. Thierwechter ( CN=Beverly B. Thierwechter/OU=OMB!O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ]       )
         READ: UNKNOWN


     TO: Mark D. Menchik ( CN;Mark D. Menchik/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: John E. Thompson ( CN;John E. Thompson/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP [ OMB 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Darlene o. Gaymon ( CN;Darlene o. Gaymon/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP [ OMB 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: James J. Jukes ( CN;James J. Jukes/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Total Pages: ____


     LRM ID: MJG192
     EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
     OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
     Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

     Friday, March 13, 1998

     LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

     TO:                      Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

     FROM:           James J. Jukes (for) Assistant Director for Legislative Reference
     OMB CONTACT:    Ingrid M. Schroeder
                                     PHONE: (202) 395-3883 FAX: (202) 395-3109
     SUBJECT:           Statement of Administration Policy on HR2294 Federal
     Courts Improvement Act of 1997

     DEADLINE:                5pm   Friday, March 13, 1998

     In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
     agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
     program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
     direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
     of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

     COMMENTS: HR 2294 is scheduled for House floor action on the suspension
     calendar on Tuesday, March 17th.

     H.R. 2294 bill text as reported from the House Judiciary Committee is
     attached for your reference.
     DISTRIBUTION LIST

     AGENCIES:
     61-JUSTICE - Andrew Fois - (202) 514-2141
     11-Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts - Michael W. Blommer - (202)
     273-1120
     92-0ffice of Personnel Management - James N. Woodruff - (202) 606-1424
     118-TREASURY - Richard S. Carro - (202) 622-0650
     59-INTERIOR - Jane Lyder - (202) 208-4371
     29-DEFENSE - Samuel T. Brick Jr' . . - (703) 697-1305
     62-LABOR - Robert A. Shapiro - (202) 219-8201
     97-Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation - Gail Sevin - (202) 326-4080

     EOP:
'.
     John E. Thompson
     Steven D. Aitken
     Mark D. Menchik
     Douglas D. McCormick
     Beverly B. Thierwechter
     Ellen J. Balis
     William P. Marshall
     Jose Cerda III
     Peter G. Jacoby
     Pamula L. Simms
     Kenneth S. Kelly
     Cathy Poynton
     Tom Stack
     Alice Shuffield
     LRM ID: MJG192 SUBJECT:       Statement of Administration Policy on HR2294
     Federal Courts Improvement Act of 1997


     RESPONSE TO
     LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
     MEMORANDUM

     If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
     comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
     response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
     call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's iine) to leave a
     message with a legislative assistant.

     You may also respond by:
              (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
     connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
              (2) sending us a memo or letter
     please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


     TO:             Ingrid M. Schroeder Phone:   395-3883   Fax:  395-3109
                     Office of Management and Budget
                     Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-3454

     FROM:                                                    (Date)

                                                              (Name)

                                                              (Agency)

                                                              (Telephone)


     The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
     the above-captioned subject:

                    Concur

                    No Objection

             _______ No Comment

                    See proposed edits on pages

                    Other:
"


                   FAX RETURN of       pages, attached to this response sheet



    DRAFT -- NOT FOR RELEASE
    March 13, 1998
    (House)                                                ·

    H.R. 2294 - Federal Courts Improvement Act
    (Coble (R) North Carolina)

    The Administration supports several provision of H.R. 2294 that would
    improve the Administration of Federal courts. The Administration,
    however, opposes House passage of the bill because it would:

     Require an annual transfer of funds from the Justice and Treasury Asset
    Forfeiture Funds to the Judiciary to cover certain costs including the
    costs of adjudicating civil and criminal forfeiture cases and providing
    counsel to indigent defendants in such cases. This provision could appear
    to represent a conflict of interest for the Judiciary branch in that it
    may obtain a pecuniary benefit from decisions forfeiting assets or funds
    to the United States.  In addition, asset forfeiture funds already are
    used to pay lien holders, victims of crime committed by the defendant, or
    others with superior rights.   (Section 101)

     Permit judges to have service previously credited under the Federal
    Employees Retirement System or the Civil Service Retirement System
    (including employer contributions) transferred to the new judicial
    officers' retirement system. This provision would create an inequitable
    balance in the manner in which transferred service credit is treated.
    (Section 102)

     Vest magistrate judges with criminal contempt authority in certain
    instances. Giving contempt authority to non-Article III judges raises
    constitutional concerns.  (Section 202)

    The Administration also has concerns regarding provisions of H.R. 2294
    which would provide 90-day annual leave carryover to "designated
    executives" and would exempt Federal Public Defenders from claims of
    malpractice or negligence in providing representational services

    Pay-As-You-Go Scoring

    H.R. 2294 is subject to the "pay-as-you-go" requirement (PAYGO) of the
    Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. The Administration's PAYGO
    estimates for this bill are under development, but the preliminary
    analysis of the bill suggest that .H.R. 2294 may result in substantial
    increases in direct spending. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reduced the
    PAYGO balances to zero, and, consequently, any bill that would increase
    mandatory spending or result in a net revenue loss could contribute to a
    sequester of mandatory programs as called for in the Budget Enforcement
    Act. As a result, if the bill were enacted, any deficit effects could
    contribute to a sequester of mandatory spending.
     * * * * * * * ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unabl~ to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D68]MAIL463884173.026 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

                             105th CONGRESS                  Automated Recores Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                2d Session

                                H. R. 2294

                            [Report No. 105-437]

                                 A BILL

To make improvements in the operation and administration of the Federal courts, and for other
purposes.



                             March 12, 1998

  Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the
                  State of the Union, and ordered to be printed

HR2294 RH

                           Union Calendar No. 247

                             105th CONGRESS

                                2d Session

                                H. R. 2294

                            [Report No. 105-437]

To make improvements in the operation and administration of the Federal courts, and for other
purposes.

                  IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                              July 30, 1997

Mr. COBLE (by request) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on
the Judiciary

                             March 12, 1998
.,
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

     Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the State of
     the
     Union, and ordered to be printed

           [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed in italic]

           [For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on July 30, 1997]



                                        A BILL

     To make improvements in the operation and administration of the Federal courts, and for other
     purposes.

         Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
         America in Congress assembled,

     SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.

         (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the 'Federal Courts Improvement Act of
         1998'.

         (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:

              Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.

     TITLE I--JUDICIAL FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION

              Sec. 101. Reimbursement of judiciary for civil and criminal forfeiture expenses.

              Sec. 102. Transfer of retirement funds.

              Sec. 103. Extension of Judiciary Information Technology Fund.

              Sec. 104. Bankruptcy fees.

              Sec. 105. Disposition of miscellaneous fees.

     TITLE II--JUDICIAL PROCESS IMPROVEMENTS

              Sec. 201. Extension of statutory authority for magistrate judge positions to be
              established in the district courts of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands.

              Sec. 202. Magistrate judge contempt authority.
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

       Sec. 203. Consent to magistrate judge authority in petty offense cases and
       magistrate judge authority in misdemeanor cases involving juvenile defendants.

       Sec. 204. Savings and loan data reporting requirements.

       Sec. 205. Place of holding court in the Eastern District of Texas,

       Sec. 206. Federal substance abuse treatment program reauthorization.

       Sec. 207. Membership in circuit judicial councils.

       Sec. 208. Sunset of civil justice expense and delay reduction plans.

       Sec. 209. Repeal of Court of Federal Claims filing fee.

       Sec. 210. Technical bankruptcy correction.

       Sec. 211. Renumbering of bankruptcy court fee schedule.

TITLE III--JUDICIAL PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION, BENEFITS, AND
PROTECTIONS

       Sec. 301. Judicial retirement matters.

       Sec. 302. Disability retirement and cost-of-living adjustments of annuities for
       territorial judges.

       Sec. 303. Federal Judicial Center personnel matters.

       Sec. 304. Judicial administrative officials retirement matters.

       Sec. 305. Judges' firearms training.

       Sec. 306. Exemption from jury service.

       Sec. 307. Expanded workers' compensation coverage for jurors.

       Sec. 308. Property damage, theft, and loss claims of jurors.

       Sec. 309. Annual leave limit for court unit executives.

       Sec. 310. Transfer of county to Middle District of Pennsylvania.

       Sec. 311. Creation of two divisions in Eastern District of Louisiana.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

        Sec. 312. District judges for the Florida district courts.

        Sec. 313. Change in composition of divisions in Western District of Tennessee.

        Sec. 314. Payments to military survivors benefits plan.

        Sec. 315. Creation of certifying officers in the judicial branch.

        Sec. 316. Authority to prescribe fees for technology resources in the courts.

TITLE IV --CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT AMENDMENTS

        Sec. 401. Maximum amounts of compensation for attorneys.

        Sec. 402. Maximum amounts of compensation for services other than counsel.

        Sec. 403. Tort Claims Act amendment relating to liability of Federal public
        defenders.

            TITLE I--JUDICIAL FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 101. REIMBURSEMENT OF JUDICIARY FOR CIVIL AND
CRIMINAL FORFEITURE EXPENSES.

   (a) Section 524(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) by inserting after paragraph (11) the following paragraph (12):

   '(12)(A) In the fiscal year subsequent to the fiscal year in which this paragraph is
   enacted and each fiscal year thereafter, an amount as specified in subparagraph (B)
   shall be transferred annually to the judiciary into the fund established under section
   1931 of this title, for expenses incurred in--

        '(i) adjudication of civil and criminal forfeiture. proceedings that result in
        deposits into the Fund (except the expense of salaries of judges);

        '(ii) representation, pursuant to the provisions of section 3006A of title 18,
        section 408(q) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 848(q)) of offenders
        whose assets have been seized in such forfeiture proceedings, to the extent that
      . such expenses of representation could have been recovered through an order
        for payment or for reimbursement of the Defender Services appropriation
        pursuant to section 3006A(f) of title 18; and

        '(iii) supervision by United States probation officers of offenders under home
        detention or other forms of confinement outside of Bureau of Prison facilities.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
     '(B) The amount to be transferred--

          '(i) shall be a portion of the total amount to be transferred from the combined
          fiscal year deposits into both the Fund and the Department of the Treasury
          Asset Forfeiture Fund established by section 9703 of title 31, United States
          Code (hereafter referred to as 'both Funds'), which total shall not exceed the
          statement of costs incurred by the Judiciary in providing the services identified
          in subparagraph (A), as set forth by the Director of the Administrative Office of
          the United States Courts in a report to the Attorney General and the Secretary
          of the Treasury no later than 90 days after the end of the fiscal year in which
          the expenses were incurred except that--

               '(I) the total amount to be transferred from both Funds shall not exceed
               $50,000,000, or 10 percent of the total combined deposits into both
               Funds, whichever is less;

               '(II) the proportion of the amount transferred from the Fund to the total
               amount to be

transferred shall be equal to the proportion of the fiscal year deposits into the Fund to the
combined fiscal year deposits in both Funds; and

               '(III) the total amount to be transferred from both Funds may exceed the
               limits set out in this subparagraph, subject to the discretion of the
               Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury.

          'Oi) shall be paid from revenues deposited into the Fund during the fiscal year
          in which the expenses were incurred and are not required to be specified in
          appropriations Acts.'.

     (b) Section 9703 of title 31, United States Code, is amended--

          (I) by redesignating subsection (p) as subsection (q); and

          (2) by inserting after subsection (0) the following new subsection:

     '(P) TRANSFER TO THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY- In the fiscal year subsequent to the
     fiscal year in which this subsection is enacted and each fiscal year thereafter, an
     amount necessary to meet the transfer requirements of section 524(c)(9) of title 28
     shall be transferred to the Judiciary, and shall be subject to the same limitations,
     terms, and conditions specified in that section for transfers to the Judiciary from the
     Department of Justice Asset Forfeiture Fund.'.

     (c) Section 1931(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting ;or other
     judicial services including services provided pursuant to section 3006A of title 18 or
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


   section 409(q) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 848(q))' after 'courts of
   the United States'.

SEC. 102. TRANSFER OF RETIREMENT FUNDS.

   Section 377 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof
   the following new subsection:

   '(P) Upon election by a bankruptcy judge or a magistrate judge under subsection (t)
   of this section, all of the accrued employer contributions and accrued interest on those
   contributions made on behalf of the bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge to the Civil
   Service Retirement and Disability Fund as defined under section 8348 of title 5, shall
   be transferred to the fund established under section 1931 of this title, that if the
   bankruptcy judge or magistrate'judge elects under section 2(c) of the Retirement and
   Survivor's Annuities for Bankruptcy Judges and Magistrates Act of 1988 (Public Law
   No.1 00-659), to receive a retirement annuity under both this section and title 5, only
   the accrued employer contributions and accrued interest on such contributions made
   on behalf of the bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge for service credited under this
   section may be transferred.'.

SEC. 103. EXTENSION OF JUDICIARY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
FUND.

   Section 612 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (I) by striking 'equipment' each place it appears and inserting 'resources';

        (2) by striking subsection (t) and redesignating subsequent subsections
        accordingly;

        (3) in subsection (g), as so redesignated, by striking paragraph (3); and

        (4) in subsection (i), as so redesignated,--

             (A) by striking 'Judiciary' each place it appears and inserting 'judiciary';

             (B) by striking 'subparagraph (c)(I)(B)' and inserting 'subsection
             (c)(1)(B)'; and

             (C) by striking 'under (c)(I)(B)' and inserting 'under subsection (c)(I)(B)'.

SEC. 104. BANKRUPTCY FEES.

   Subsection (a) of section 1930 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding
   at the end the following new paragraph:
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


        '(7) In districts that are not part of a United States trustee region as defined in
        section 581 of this title, the Judicial Conference of the United States may
        require the debtor in a case under chapter II of title II to pay fees equal to
        those imposed by paragraph (6) of this subsection. Such fees shall be deposited
        as offsetting receipts to the fund established under section 1931 of this title and
        shall remain available until expended.'.

SEC. lOS. DISPOSITION OF MISCELLANEOUS FEES.

   For fiscal year 1997 and thereafter, any portion of miscellaneous fees collected as
   prescribed by the Judicial Conference of the United States pursuant to section 1913,
   1914(b), 1926(a), 1930(b), and 1932 of title 28, United States Code, exceeding the
   amount of such fees established on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be
   deposited into the special fund of the Treasury established under section 1931 of title
   28, United States Code.

             TITLE n--JUDICIAL PROCESS IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 201. EXTENSION OF STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR MAGISTRATE
JUDGE POSITIONS TO BE ESTABLISHED IN THE DISTRICT COURTS
OF GUAM AND THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS.

   Section 631 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) by striking the first two sentences of subsection (a) and inserting the
        following: 'The judges of each United States district court and the district
        courts of the Virgin Islands, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands shall
        appoint United States magistrate judges in such numbers and to serve at such
        locations within the judicial districts as the Judicial Conference may determine
        under this chapter. In the case of a magistrate judge appointed by the district
        court ofthe Virgin Islands, Guam, or the Northern Mariana Islands, this
        chapter shall apply as though the court appointing such a magistrate judge
        were a United States district court.'; and

        (2) by inserting in the first sentence of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) after
        'Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,' the following: 'the Territory of Guam, the
        Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,'.

SEC. 202. MAGISTRATE JUDGE CONTEMPT AUTHORITY.

   Section 636(e) of title 28, United States Code is amended to read as follows:

   '(e) CONTEMPT AUTHORITY-

        '(I) IN GENERAL- A United States magistrate judge serving under this chapter
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


shall have within the territorial jurisdiction prescribed by his or her
appointment the power to exercise contempt authority as set forth in this
section.

'(2) SUMMARY CRIMINAL CONTEMPT AUTHORITY- A magistrate judge
shall have the power to punish summarily by fine or imprisonment such
contempt of his or her authority constituting misbehavior of any person in the
magistrate fudge's presence so as to obstruct the administration of justice. The
order of contempt shall be issued pursuant to the Federal Rules of Criminal
Procedure.

'(3) ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL CONTEMPT AUTHORITY IN CIVIL CONSENT
AND MISDEMEANOR CASES- In any case in which a United States magistrate
judge presides with the consent of the parties under subsection (c) of this
section, and in any misdemeanor case proceeding before a magistrate judge
under section 3401 oftitle 18, the magistrate judge shall have the power to
punish by fine or imprisonment such criminal contempt constituting
disobedience or resistance to the magistrate judge's lawful writ, process, order,
rule, decree, or command. Disposition of such contempt shall be conducted
upon notice and hearing pursuant to the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.

'(4) CIVIL CONTEMPT AUTHORITY IN CIVIL CONSENT AND
MISDEMEANOR CASES- In any case in which a United States magistrate
judge presides with the consent of the parties under subsection (c) of this
section, and in any misdemeanor case proceeding before a magistrate judge
under section 3401 of title 18, the magistrate judge may exercise the civil
contempt authority of the district court. This subsection shall not be construed
to limit the authority of a magistrate judge to order sanctions pursuant to any
other statute, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, or the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedure.

'(5) CRIMINAL CONTEMPT PENAL TIES- The sentence imposed by a
magistrate judge for any criminal contempt provided for in paragraphs (2) and
(3) shall not exceed the penalties for a Class C misdemeanor as set forth in
sections 3581(b)(8) and 357 1(b)(6) of title 18.

'(6) CERTIFICATION OF OTHER CONTEMPTS TO THE DISTRICT COURT-
Upon the commission of any such act--

     '(A) in any case in which a United States magistrate judge presides with
     the consent of the parties under subsection (c) of this section, or in any
     misdemeanor case proceeding before a magistrate judge under section
     3401 of title 18, that may, in the opinion of the magistrate judge,
     constitute a serious criminal contempt punishable by penalties exceeding
     those set forth in paragraph (5) of this subsection, or
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

            '(B) in any other case or proceeding under subsection (a) or (b) of this
            section, or any other statute, where--

                '(i) the act committed in the magistrate judge's presence may, in
                the opinion of the magistrate judge, constitute a serious criminal ~,.
                contempt punishable by penalties exceeding those set forth in
                paragraph (5) of this subsection, or

                 '(ii) the act that constitutes a criminal contempt occurs outside the
                 presence of the magistrate judge, or

                 '(iii) the act constitutes a civil contempt,

           the magistrate judge shall forthwith certify the facts to a district judge
           and may serve or cause to be served upon any person whose behavior is
           brought into question under this paragraph an order requiring such
           person to appear before a district judge upon a day certain to show cause
           why he or she should not be adjudged in contempt by reason of the facts
           so certified. The district judge shall thereupon hear the evidence as to the
           act or conduct complained of and, if it is such as to warrant punishment,
           punish such person in the same manner and to the same extent as for a
           contempt committed before a district judge.

       '(7) APPEALS OF MAGISTRATE JUDGE CONTEMPT ORDERS- The appeal
       of an order of contempt pursuant to this section shall be made to the court of
       appeals in cases proceeding under subsection (c) of this section. In any other
       proceeding in which a United States magistrate judge presides under subsection
       (a) or (b) of this section, section 3401 oftitle \8, or any other statute, the
       appeal of a magistrate judge's summary contempt order shall be made to the
       district court.'.

SEC. 203. CONSENT TO MAGISTRATE JUDGE AUTHORITY IN PETTY
OFFENSE CASES AND MAGISTRATE JUDGE AUTHORITY IN
MISDEMEANOR CASES INVOLVING JUVENILE DEFENDANTS.

   (a) AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 18-

       (1) Section 3401(b) oftitle 18, United States Code, is amended by striking 'that
       is a class B misdemeanor charging a motor vehicle offense, a class C
       misdemeanor, or an infraction,' after 'petty offense'.

       (2) Section 3401 (g) oftitle 18, United States Code, is amended--

            (A) by striking the first sentence and inserting the following: 'The
            magistrate judge may, in a petty offense case involving a juvenile,
                                                                      Ilcx-Dump Conversion

             exercise all powers granted to the district court under chapter 403 of this
             title.';

             (B) in the second sentence by striking the phrase 'other class B or C
             misdemeanor case' and inserting 'misdemeanor, other than a petty
             offense,'; and

             (C) by striking the last sentence.

   (b) AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 28- Section 636(a) of title 28, United States Code, is
   amended by striking paragraphs (4) and (5) and inserting in the following:

        '(4) the power to enter a sentence for a petty offense; and

        '(5) the power to enter a sentence for a class A misdemeanor in a case in which
        the parties have consented.'.

SEC. 204. SAVINGS AND LOAN DATA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

   Section 604 of title 28, United States Code, is amended in subsection (a) by striking
   the second paragraph designated (24).

SEC. 205. PLACE OF HOLDING COURT IN THE EASTERN DISTRICT
OF TEXAS.

   (a) TEXAS- The second sentence of section 124(c)(3) of title 28, United States Code, is
   amended by inserting 'and Plano' after 'held at Sherman'.

   (b) TEXARKANA- Sections 83(b)(I) and I 24(c)(6) oftitle 28, United States Code, are
   each amended by adding before the period at the end of the last sentence the
   following: " and may be held anywhere within the Federal courthouse in Texarkana
   that is located astride the State line between Texas and Arkansas'.

SEC. 206. FEDERAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT PROGRAM
REAUTHORIZATION.

   Section 4(a) of the Contract Services for Drug Dependent Federal Offenders
   Treatment Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-537; 92 Stat. 2038; 18 U.S.C. 3672 note) is
   amended by striking all that follows 'there are authorized to be appropriated' and
   inserting 'for fiscal year 1998 and each fiscal year thereafter such sums as may be
   necessary to carry out this Act.'.

SEC. 207. MEMBERSHIP IN CIRCUIT JUDICIAL COUNCILS.

   Section 332(a) oftitle 28, United States Code, is amended--
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
        (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the fOllowing:

   '(1) The chief judge of each judicial circuit shall call and preside at a meeting of the
   judicial council of the circuit at least twice in each year and at such places as he or
   she may designate. The council shall consist of an equal number of circuit judges
   (including the chief judge of the circuit) and district judges, as such number is
   determined by majority vote of all such judges of the circuit in regular active service.';

        (2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following:

   '(3) Except for the chief judge of the circuit, either judges in regular active service or
   judges retired from regular active service under section 371(b) of this title may serve
   as members of the council.'; and

        (3) by striking 'retirement,' in paragraph (5) and inserting 'retirement pursuant
        to section 371(a) or section 372(a) of this title,'.

SEC. 208. SUNSET OF CIVIL JUSTICE EXPENSE AND DELAY
REDUCTION PLANS.

   Section 103(b)(2)(A) of the Civil Justice Reform Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-650;
   104 Stat. 5096; 28 U.S.C. 471 note), as amended by Public Law 105-53 (111 Stat.
   1173), is amended by inserting '471,' after 'sections'.

SEC. 209. REPEAL OF COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS FILING FEE.

   Section 2520 oftitle 28, United States Code, and the item relating to such section in
   the table of contents for chapter 165 of such title, are repealed.

SEC. 210. TECHNICAL BANKRUPTCY CORRECTION.

   Section 1228 oftitle 11, United States Code, is amended by striking' 1222(b)(10)'
   each place it appears and inserting' 1222(b)(9)'.

SEC. 211. RENUMBERING OF BANKRUPTCY COURT FEE SCHEDULE.

   Section 406(b) of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary,
   and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1990 (Public Law 101-162; 103 Stat. 1016;
   28 U.S.C. 1931 note) is amended in the first sentence by striking 'for any service
   enumerated after item 18' and inserting 'for any fee implemented after November 21,
   1989'.

  TITLE I1I--JUDICIAL PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION, BENEFITS, AND
                        PROTECTIONS
SEC. 301. JUDICIAL RETIREMENT MATTERS.                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

       Section 371 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

            (1) in subsection (a) by inserting '(1)' after 'subsection (c)';

           (2) in subsection (b)(I) by inserting '(2)' after 'subsection (c)'; and

            (3) in subsection (c)--

                 (A) by inserting' (1)' after' (c)';

                 (B) by striking 'this section' and inserting 'subsection (a)'; and

                 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:

       '(2) The age and service requirements for retirement under subsection (b)(1) are as
       follows:

                                      'Attained age:

                                   Years of Service:

60

--20

61

--19

62

--18

63

--17

64

--16

65
--15
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
66

--14

67

--13

68

--12

69

--11

70

--10'.

SEC. 302. DISABILITY RETIREMENT AND COST-Of-LIVING
ADJUSTMENTS Of ANNUITIES fOR TERRITORIAL JUDGES.

         Section 373 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

             (1) by amending subsection (c)(4) to read as follows:

         '(4) Any senior judge performing judicial duties pursuant to recall under paragraph
         (2) of this subsection shall be paid, while performing such duties, the same
         compensation (in lieu of the annuity payable under this section) and the same
         allowances for travel and other expenses as ajudge on active duty with the court
         being served.';

             (2) by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:

       '(e)(I) Any judge of the District Court of Guam, the District Court of the Northern
       Mariana Islands, or the District Court of the Virgin Islands who is not reappointed (as
       judge of such court) shall be entitled, upon attaining the age of 65 years or upon
       relinquishing office if the judge is then beyond the age of 65 years--

             '(A) if the judicial service of such judge, continuous or otherwise, aggregates 15
             years or more, to receive during the remainder of such judge's life an annuity
             equal to the salary received when the judge left office; or
                                                                       Hex-Dump Ccnversicn

        '(B) if such judicial service, continuous or otherwise, aggregated less than 15
        years, to receive during the remainder of such judge's life an annuity equal to
        that proportion of such salary which the aggregate number of such judge's
        years of service bears to 15.

   '(2) Any judge of the District Court of Guam, the District Court of the Northern
   Mariana Islands, or the District Court of the Virgin Islands who has served at least
   five years, continuously or otherwise, and who retires or is removed upon the sole
   ground of mental or physical disability, shall be entitled to receive during the
   remainder of such judge's life an annuity equal to 40 percent of the salary received
   when the judge left office, or, in the case of a judge who has served at least ten years,
   continuously or otherwise, an annuity equal to that proportion of such salary which
   the aggregate number of such judge's years of judicial service bears to IS.'; and

        (3) amending subsection (g) to read as follows:

   '(g) Any retired judge who is entitled to receive an annuity under this section shall be
   entitled to a cost-of-living adjustment in the amount computed as specified in section
   8340(b) of title 5, except that in no case may the annuity payable to such retired
   judge, as increased under this subsection, exceed the salary of a judge in regular
   active service with the court on which the retired judge served before retiring.'.

SEC. 303. FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER PERSONNEL MATTERS.

   Section 625 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) in subsection (b)--

             (A) by striking', United States Code,';

             (B) by striking 'pay rates, section 5316, title 5, United States Code' and
             inserting 'under section 5316 of title 5, except that the Director may fix
             the compensation of 4 positions of the Center at a level not to exceed the
             annual rate of pay in effect for level IV of the Executive Schedule under
             section 5315 of title 5'; and

             (C) by striking 'the Civil Servive' and all. that follows through 'Code' and
             inserting '~subchapter III of chapter 83 of title 5 shall be adjusted
             pursuant to the provisions of section &344 of such title, and the salary of
             a reemployed annuitant under chapter 84 of title 5 shall be adjusted
             pursuant to the provisions of section 8468 of such title'; and

        (2) in subsection (c) by striking', United States Code,' each place it appears.

SEC. 304. JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS RETIREMENT
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

MATTERS.

     (a) DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE- Section 611 of title 28, United
     States Code, is amended--

          (1) in subsection (d), by inserting 'a congressional employee in the capacity of
          primary administrative assistant to a Member of Congress or in the capacity of
          staff director or chief counsel for the majority or the minority of a committee or
          subcommittee

of the Senate or House of Representatives,' after' Congress,';

          (2) in subsection (b )--

               (A) by striking 'who has served at least fifteen years and' and inserting
               'who has at least fifteen years of service and has';

               (B) in the first undesignated paragraph, by striking 'who has served at
               least ten years,' and inserting 'who has at least ten years of service,'; and

          (3) in subsection (c )--

               (A) by striking 'served at least fifteen years,' and inserting 'at least fifteen
               years of service,'; and

               (B) by striking 'served less than fifteen years,' and inserting 'less than
               fifteen years of service,'.

     (b) DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER- Section 627 of title 28,
     United States Code, is amended--

          (1) in subsection (e), by inserting 'a congressional employee in the capacity of
          primary administrative assistant to a Member of Congress or in the capacity of
          staff director or chief counsel for the majority or the minority of a committee or
          subcommittee of the Senate or House of Representatives,' after 'Congress,';

          (2) in subsection (c )--

               (A) by striking 'who has served at least fifteen years and' and inserting
               'who has at least fifteen years of service and has'; .

               (B) in the first undesignated paragraph, by striking 'who has served at
               least ten years,' and inserting 'who has at least ten years of service,'; and

          (3) in subsection (d)--
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

               (A) by striking' served at least fifteen years,' and inserting' at least fifteen
               years of service,'; and

               (B) by striking 'served less than fifteen years,' and inserting 'less than
               fifteen years of service,'.

SEC. 305. JUDGES' FIREARMS TRAINING.

     (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 21 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding
     at the end thereof the following new section:

'Sec. 464. Carrying of firearms by judicial officers

     '(a) AUTHORITY- A judicial officer of the United States is authorized to carry a
     firearm, whether concealed or not, under regulations promulgated by the Judicial
     Conference of the United States. The authority granted by this section shaH extend
     only to--

          '(I) those States in which the carrying of firearms by judicial officers of the
          State is permitted by State law, and

          '(2) regardless of State law, to any place where the judicial officer of the United
          States sits, resides, or is present on official travel status.

     '(b) IMPLEMENTATION-

          '(I) REGULA TIONS- The regulations promulgated by the Judicial Conference
          under subsection (a) shaH--

               '(A) require a demonstration of a judicial officer's proficiency in the use
               and safety of firearms as a prerequisite to the carrying of firearms under
               the authority of this section; and

               '(B) ensure that the carrying of a firearm by a judicial officer under the
               protection of the United States Marshals Service while away from United
               States courthouses is consistent with the policy of the Marshals Service on
               the carrying of firearms by persons receiving such protection.

          '(2) ASSISTANCE BY OTHER AGENCIES- At the request of the Judicial
          Conference, the Department of Justice and appropriate law enforcement
          components of the Department shall assist the Judicial Conference in
          developing and providing training to assist judicial officers in securing the
          proficiency referred to in subsection (b)(I).

     '(c) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, the term, 'judicial officer of the
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

United States' means--

     '(1) a justice or judge of the United States as defined in section 451 in regular
     active service or retired from regular active service;

     '(2) a justice or judge of the United States who has retired from the judicial
     office under section 371(a) for--

          '(A) a I-year period following such justice's or judge's retirement; or

          '(B) a longer period of time if approved by the Judicial Conference of the
          United States when exceptional circumstances warrant;

     '(3) a United States bankruptcy judge;

     '(4) a full-time or part-time United States magistrate judge;

     '(5) ajudge of the United States Court of Federal Claims;

     '(6) ajudge of the United States District Court of Guam;

   . '(7) ajudge of the United States District Court for the Northern Mariana
     Islands;

     '(8) ajudge of the United States District Court of the Virgin Islands; or

     '(9) an individual who is retired from one of the judicial positions described
     under paragraphs (3) through (8) to the extent provided for in regulations of
     the Judicial Conference of the United States.

'(d) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding section 46303(c)(l) of title 49, nothing in this
section authorizes a judicial officer of the United States to carry a dangerous weapon
on an aircraft or other common carrier.'.

(b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of sections for
chapter 21 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof
the following:

     '464. Carrying of firearms by judicial officers.'.

(c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect upon
the earlier of the promulgation of regulations by the Judicial Conference under the
amendments made by this section or one year after the date of the enactment of this
Act.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
SEC. 306. EXEMPTION FROM JURY SERVICE.

   (a) MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES- Paragraph (6) of section 1863(b) of title
   28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:

        '(6) specify that members in active service in the Armed Forces of the United
        States are barred from jury service on the ground that they are exempt.'.

   (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 1869 if title 28, United States Code, is
   amended by repealing subsection (i).

SEC. 307. EXPANDED WORKERS' COMPENSATION COVERAGE FOR
JURORS.

   Paragraph (2) of section 1877(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) by striking 'or' at the end of clause (C); and

        (2) by inserting', or (E) traveling to or from the courthouse pursuant to a jury
        summons or sequestration order, or as otherwise necessitated by order of the
        court' before the period at the end of clause (D).

SEC. 308. PROPERTY DAMAGE, THEFT, AND LOSS CLAIMS OF
JURORS.

   Section 604 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof
   the following new subsection:

   '(i) The Director may pay a claim by a person summoned to serve or serving as a
   grand juror or petit juror for loss of, or damage to, personal property that occurs
   incident to that person's performance of duties in response to the summons or at the
   direction of an officer of the court. With respect to claims, the Director shall have the
   authority granted to the head of an agency by section 3721 of title 31 for
   consideration of employees' personal property claims. The Director shall prescribe
   guidelines for the consideration of claims under this subsection.'.

SEC. 309. ANNUAL LEAVE LIMIT FOR COURT UNIT EXECUTIVES.

   Section 6304(f)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end
   thereof the following:

        '(F) the judicial branch designated as a court unit executive position by the
        Judicial Conference of the United States.'.

SEC. 310. TRANSFER OF COUNTY TO MIDDLE DISTRICT OF
                                                                           Hex-Dump Ccnversicn
PENNSYLVANIA.

   (a) TRANSFER- Section 118 of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

       (1) in subsection (a) by striking 'Philadelphia, and Schuylkill' and inserting 'and
       Philadelphia'; and

       (2) in subsection (b) by inserting 'Schuylkill,' after 'Potter,'.

   (b) EFFECTIVE DATE-

       (1) IN GENERAL- This section and the amendments made by this section shall
       take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

       (2) PENDING CASES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments
       made by this section shall not affect any action commenced before the effective
       date ofthis section and pending on such date in the United States District Court
       for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

       (3) JURIES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments made by this
       section shall not affect the composition, or preclude the service, of any grand or
       petit jury summoned, impaneled, or actually serving on the effective date of this
       section.

SEC. 311. CREATION OF TWO DIVISIONS IN EASTERN DISTRICT OF
LOUISIANA.

   (a) CREATION OF TWO DIVISIONS- Section 98(a) of title 28, United States Code, is
   amended to read as follows:

   '(a) The Eastern District comprises two divisions.

        '(1) The New Orleans Division comprises the parishes of Jefferson, Orleans,
        Plaquemines, Saint Bernard, Saint Charles, Saint John the Baptist, Saint
        Tammany, Tangipahoa, and Washington.

        'Court for the New Orleans Division shall be held at New Orleans.

        '(2) The Houma Division comprises the parishes of Assumption, Lafourche,
        Saint James, and Terrebonne.

        'Court for the Houma Division shall be held at Houma.'.

   (b) EFFECTIVE D ATE-
                                                                             Hex-Dump Ccnversicn


            (1) IN GENERAL- This section and the amendments made by this section shall
            take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

            (2) PENDING CASES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments
            made by this section shall not affect any action commenced before the effective
            date of this section and pending on such date in the United States District Court
            for the Eastern District of Louisiana or in the United States District Court for
            the Western District of Louisiana.

            (3) JURIES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments made by this
            section shall not affect the composition, or preclude the service, of any grand or
            petit jury summoned, impaneled, or actually serving on the effective date of this
            section.

SEC. 312. DISTRICT JUDGES FOR THE FLORIDA DISTRICT COURTS.

       (a) IN GENERAL- The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of
       the Senate--

            (1) 3 additional district judges for the middle district of Florida; and

            (2) 2 additional district judges for the southern district of Florida.

       (b) TEMPORARY JUDGESHIP-

            (1) IN GENERAL- The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and
            consent of the Senate, 1 additional district judge for the middle district of
            Florida.

           (2) FIRST VACANCY NOT FILLED- The first vacancy in the office of district
           judge in the middle district of Florida, occurring 7 years or more after the
           confirmation date of the judge named to fill a temporary judgeship created by
           this subsection, shall not be filled.

       (c) TABLES- In order that the table contained in section 133 oftide 28, United States
       Code, reflects the changes in the total number of permanent district judgeships.
       authorized by subsection (a) of this section, the item relating to Florida in such table is
       amended to read as follows:

4

14

18'.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

   (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
   appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
   section, including such sums as may be necessary to provide appropriate space and
   facilities for the judicial positions created by this section.

   (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section and the amendments made by this section shall
   take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 313. CHANGE IN COMPOSITION OF DIVISIONS IN WESTERN
DISTRICT OF TENNESSEE.

   (a) IN GENERAL- Section 123(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting 'Dyer,' after 'Decatur,'; and

        (2) in paragraph (2) by striking 'Dyer,'.

   (b) EFFECTIVE DATE-

        (1) IN GENERAL- This section and the amendments made by this section shall
        take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

        (2) PENDING CASES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments
        made by this section shall not affect any action commenced before the effective
        date of this section and pending in the United States District Court for the
        Western District of Tennessee on such date.

        (3) JURIES NOT AFFECTED- This section and the amendments made by this
        section shall not affect the composition, or preclude the service, of any grand or
        petit jury summoned, empaneled, or actually serving in the Western Judicial
        District of Tennessee on the effective date of this section.

SEC. 314. PAYMENTS TO MILITARY SURVIVORS BENEFITS PLAN.

   Section 371(e) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after 'such
   retired or retainer pay' the following: " except such pay as is deductible from the
   retired or retainer pay as a result of participation in any survivor's benefits plan in
   connection with the retired pay,'.

SEC. 315. CREATION OF CERTIFYING OFFICERS IN THE JUDICIAL
BRANCH.

   (a) APPOINTMENT OF DISBURSING AND CERTIFYING OFFICERS- Chapter 41
   of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new
   section:
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
'Sec. 613. Disbursing and certifying officers

    '(a) DISBURSING OFFICERS- The Director may designate in writing officers and
    employees of the judicial branch of the Government, including the courts as defined in
    section 610 other than the Supreme Court, to be disbursing officers in such numbers
    and locations as the Director considers necessary. These disbursing officers shall--

          '(1) disburse moneys appropriated to the judicial branch and otherfunds only in
          strict accordance

with payment requests certified by the Director or in accordance with subsection (b);

          '(2) examine payment requests as necessary to ascertain whether they are in
          proper form, certified, and approved; and

          '(3) be held accountable for their actions as provided by law, except such a
          disbursing officer shall not be held accountable or responsible for any illegal,
          improper, or incorrect payment resulting from any false, inaccurate, or
          misleading certificate for which a certifying officer is responsible under
          subsection (b).

     '(b) CERTIFYING OFFICERS- (1) The Director may designate in writing officers and
     employees of the judicial branch of the Government, including the courts as defined in
     section 610 other than the Supreme Court, to certify payment requests payable from
     appropriations and funds. These certifying officers shall be responsible and
     accountable for--

          '(A) the existence and correctness of the facts recited in the certificate or other
          request for payment or its supporting papers;

          '(B) the legality of the proposed payment under the appropriation or fund
          involved; and

          '(C) the correctness of the computations of certified payment requests.

      '(2) The liability of a certifying officer shall be enforced in the same manner and to the
      same extent as provided by law with respect to the enforcement of the liability of
      disbursing and other accountable officers. A certifying officer shall be required to
      make restitution to the United States for the amount of any illegal, improper, or
      incorrect payment resulting from any false, inaccurate, or misleading certificates
      made by the certifying officer, as well as for any payment prohibited by law or which
    . did not represent a legal obligation under the appropriation or fund involved.

     '(c) RlGHTS- A certifying or disbursing officer--
                                                                        ! lex-Dump Conversion

          '(1) has the right to apply for and obtain a decision by the Comptroller General
          on any question of law involved in a payment request presented for
          certification; and

          '(2) is entitled to relief from liability arising under this section in accordance
          with title 31.

    '(d) OTHER AUTHORITY NOT AFFECTED- Nothing in this section affects the
    authority of the courts with respect to moneys deposited with the courts under chapter
    129 of this title.'.

    (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 41 oftitle 28,
    United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following item:

          '613. Disbursing and certifying officers.'.

    (c) DUTIES OF DIRECTOR- Paragraph (8) of subsection (a) of section 604 of title 28,
    United States Code, is amended to read as follows:

          '(8) Disburse appropriations and other funds for the maintenance and operation
          of the courts;'.

SEC. 316. AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE FEES FOR TECHNOLOGY
RESOURCES IN THE COURTS.

    (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 41 oftide 28, United States Code, is amended by adding
    at the end the following:

'Sec. 614. Authority to prescribe fees for technology resources in the courts

    'The Judicial Conference is authorized to prescribe reasonable fees pursuant to
    sections 1913, 1914, 1926, 1930, and 1932, for collection by the courts for use of
    information technology resources provided by the judiciary for remote access to the
    courthouse by litigants and the public, and to facilitate the electronic presentation of
    cases. Fees under this section may be collected only to cover the costs of making such
    information technology resources available for the purposes set forth in this section.
    Such fees shall not be required of persons financially unable to pay them. All fees
    collected under this section shall be deposited in the Judiciary Information Technology
    Fund and be available to the Director without fiscal year limitation to be expended on
    information technology resources developed or acquired to advance the purposes set
    forth in this section.'.

     (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 41 of title 28,
     United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

        '614. Authority to prescribe fees for technology resources in the courts.'.

            TITLE IV --CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT AMENDMENTS

SEC. 401. MAXIMUM AMOUNTS OF COMPENSATION FOR
ATTORNEYS.

   Paragraph (2) of subsection (d) of section 3006A of title 18, United States Code, is
   amended--

        (1) in the first sentence--

             (A) by striking '3,500' and inserting '5,000';

             (B) by striking' 1,000' and inserting' 1,500';

        (2) in the second sentence by striking '2,500' and inserting '3,600';

        (3) in the third sentence--

             (A) by striking '750' and inserting' 1,100';

             (B) by striking '2,500' and inserting '3,600';

        (4) inserting after the second sentence the following new sentence: 'For
        representation of a petitioner in a non-capital habeas corpus proceeding, the
        compensation for each attorney shall not exceed the amount applicable to a
        felony in this paragraph for representation of a defendant before a United
        States magistrate or the district court, or both. For representation of such
        petitioner in an appellate court, the compensation for each attorney shall not
        exceed the amount applicable for representation of a defendant in an appellate
        court.'; 'and

        (5) in the last sentence by striking '750' and inserting' 1,100'.

SEC. 402. MAXIMUM AMOUNTS OF COMPENSA nON FOR SERVICES
OTHER THAN COUNSEL.

   Section 3006A(e) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--

        (1) in paragraph (2)--

             (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking '300' and inserting '450'; and

             (B) in subparagraph (B) by striking' 300' and inserting '450'; and
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

       (2) in paragraph (3) in the first sentence by striking' 1,000' and inserting
       , 1,500'.

SEC. 403. TORT CLAIMS ACT AMENDMENT RELATING TO LIABILITY
OF FEDERAL PUBLIC DEFENDERS.

   Section 2671 of title 28, United States Code, is amended in the second undesignated
   paragraph--

       (1) by inserting '(1)' after 'includes'; and

       (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting the following: " and (2) any
       officer 9r employee of a Federal public defender organization, except when
       such officer or employee performs professional services in the course of
       providing representation under section 3006A oftitle 18.'.

END
                                                                    Hc.'(oDump Conversion
DRAFT -- NOT FOR RELEASE

                                                                           March 13, 1998
                                                                           (House)


                        n.R. 2294 - Federal Courts Improvement Act
                                   (Coble (R) North Carolina)

The Administration supports several provision ofH.R. 2294 that would improve the .
Administration of Federal courts. The Administration, however, opposes House passage of the
bill because it would:

·      Require an annual transfer of funds from the Justice and Treasury Asset Forfeiture Funds
       to the judiciary to cover certain costs including the costs of adjudicating civil and
       criminal forfeiture cases and providing counsel to indigent defendants in such cases.
       This provision could appear to represent a conflict of interest for the Judiciary branch in
       that it may obtain a pecuniary benefit from decisions forfeiting assets or funds to the
       United States. In addition, asset forfeiture funds already are used to pay lien holders,
       victims of crime committed by the defendant, or others with superior rights. (Section
       101)

·      Permit judges to have service previously credited under the Federal Employees
       Retirement System or the Civil Service Retirement System (including employer
       contributions) transferred to the new judicial officers' retirement system. This provision
       would create an inequitable balance in the manner in which transferred service credit is
       treated. (Section 102)

·      Vest magistrate judges with criminal contempt authority in certain instances. Giving
       contempt authority to non-Article IUjudges raises constitutional concerns. (Section 202)

The Administration also has concerns regarding provisions.ofH.R. 2294 which would provide
90-day annual leave carryover to "designated executives" and would exempt Federal Public
Defenders from claims of malpractice or negligence in providing representational services

Pay-As-You-Go Scoring

H.R. 2294 is subject to the "pay-as-you-go" requirement (P A YGO) of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1990. The Administration's PA YGO estimates for this bill are under
development, but the preliminary analysis of the bill suggest that H.R. 2294 may result in
substantial increases in direct spending. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reduced the P A YGO
balances to zero, and, consequently, any bill that would increase mandatory spending or result in
a net revenue loss could contribute to a sequester of mandatory programs as called for in the
Budget Enforcement Act. As a result, if the bill were enacted, any deficit effects could
contribute to a sequester of mandatory spending.
*******   Hex-Dump Conversion


