     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

     CREATION DATE/TIME:17-MAR-1998 17:06:51.00

     SUBJECT:   Q&A due tonight forAFL-CIO briefing book on FICA and workfare

     TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Attached is a draft Q&A on FICA/workfare for you to review. According to
     Tramantano, the VP will get a question on this from McEntee.  FYI, Bruce's
     guidance to me on this was, "Just make sure the VP understands that quite
     apart from the Treasury ruling, we're already on record as favoring a
     legislative exemption from FICA/FUTA for workfare positions, as part of
     our strategy to hold onto FLSA."

     Exempting workfare positions from FICA Taxes

     Question:  Is it true that the Treasury Department and Internal Revenue
     Service are about to undermine our hard-won labor protections for welfare
     recipients by ruling that workfare payments are not subject to FICA and
     unemployment taxes?

     Answer:         As you know, the Administration has been steadfast in its
     position that worker protecti~n laws, such as the Fair Labor Standards
     Act, should apply to workfare participants in the same way they apply to
     other workers.   If a workfare participant counts as an "employee" under
     these laws, then she should get protection.   No one doing real work should
     be paid a subminimum wage.   We have repeatedly told the states that paying
     working welfare recipients the minimum wage and giving them other worker
     protections will promote, not undermine, the goals of welfare reform,
     because it will give them the ability to support their families and break
     the cycle of dependency.

     The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service have been
     exploring for months the question of how FICA and FUTA apply to welfare
     recipients in workfare programs, and they hope to have an answer to this
     question shortly.

     In last yearD,s legislative debate, we went on record in favor of a narrow
     legislative fix exempting workfare participants from these tax laws.   We
     did so because we believe that removing the tax issues from the debate
     will make it more likely, not less likely, that we will prevail in our
     efforts to preserve worker protections, including the minimum wage, for
     those in workfare programs.

     Background
     Labor Protections: A key question for labor and for states is whether
     workfare participants have protections under labor laws such as the Fair
     Labor Standards Act, including payment of the minimum wage, worker safety
     laws, anti-discrimination laws, and collective bargaining rights. The
ии   '"
     labor movement believes strongly that workfare participants should have
     all these protections, while Governors have resisted them to varying
     degrees because they make workfare programs more expensive and complex to
     manage.  (Most Governors have conceded that it is fair to pay the minimum
     wage and offering safety protections.)

     The Administration has largely agreed with organized labor on this issue.
     Department of Labor guidance issued last May clarified that most workfare
     participants are essentially employees and entitled to most protections.
     Last fall, Congressional Republicans vowed to reverse this guidance but
     failed to do so because of dissension in their caucus over how far to go.

     Tax Issue:  A related issue is whether workfare jobs should be subject to
     FICA and unemployment taxes.  Governors have been vehement in opposition
     to these taxes, especially key Democratic Governors such as Carper and
     Chiles.

     Within a week or so, the Treasury Department expects to issue a notice
     that clarifies that these jobs are exempt from taxes under current law.
     The notice says that workfare jobs are distinct from other jobs because
     the payment is determined more by state welfare policy and family need
     than the value of services performed. The unions are aware of this
     notice, and oppose it on the grounds that states might try to use its
     logic in court to argue against other labor protections. However, our
     position is that taking this action, whether legislatively or
     administratively, will remove the momentum from Congressional efforts to
     weaken labor protections, while not putting labor protections at any
     significant risk.


