RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DAT'E/TIME:17-MAR-1998 17:19:40.00

SUBJECT:   u.S. news item

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
It's nice to see that Sylvia has been able to distance herself from the
race initiative:

Outlook 3/23/98

                  WASHINGTON WHISPERS


                  Restarting the race dialogue
                  Frustrated by his advisory board,
                  Clinton looks elsewhere for help

                  His early expectations dampened, President Clinton no
                  longer believes his much-ballyhooed advisory board
                  can advance a national dialogue on racial issues. After a
                  slow start when the panel was created last year, the
                  board has been holding public meetings around the
                  country, yet has generated little publicity and has been
                  derided in some quarters. Aides say Clinton values the
                  group for raising some interesting issues, such as
                  America's increasing cultural and ethnic diversity, but
                  he is looking elsewhere for bold initiatives. Clinton is
                  now relying on advisers in the White House, especially
                  his Domestic Policy Council and National Economic
                  Council, and key staffers such as Bruce Reed, Gene
                  Sperling, and Sylvia Mathews to generate big ideas. A
                  team of outside scholars is working, independent of the
                  advisory board, to develop 15 to 20 papers outlining
                  current and future racial problems and to propose
                  solutions on issues that include unemployment,
                  inadequate health care, and unequal education. And the
                  president is listening to the advice of outside experts
                  such as Jesse Jackson on how to re-energize his race
                  initiative. "The president wants to create a legacy of
                  racial healing," says a friend. "He wants something
                  significant--he's insisting on it."




                                        ·


