RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-MAR-1998 14:54:38.00

SUBJECT:   One last issue on HHS letter to Shaw

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
HHS feels our redraft of the Shaw letter omits one key argument as to why
we chose to proceed with work measures only and no family formation
measure: because it is already 5-6 months into the fiscal year and states
needed guidance.  Here is a rewrite, with changes in bold, that Cynthia
and I conferred on and think is OK.  Let me know if it is all right with
you or if it's a problem.

Dear Congressman Shaw:

Thank you for your letter of March 5 concerning the "Draft Potential
Specifications for Interim Award of High Performance Bonus (FY 1999)."   I
value your perspective on this very important matter.

The proposed specifications are intended to be included in guidance that
would be effective only in the first bonus year.  They were developed in
consultation with the National Governors' Association, the American Public
welfare Association, the National Conference of State Legislatures and
State representatives.  I believe that they reflect the most integral
aspects of work in welfare reform.  The four work measures we will use to
award the first year High Performance Bonus (HPB) reflect all aspects of a
state's success in moving families from welfare to employment-based
self-sufficiency.  Full success requires recipients not only to get jobs,
but sustain them, and to increase their earnings in order to be
independent and capable of supporting their families.

In our extensive consultations, we explored a range of measures addressing
including ·family formation and stability. We moved ahead with respect to
work, because we believed it was vital for states to have guidance with
respect to how FY 1998 performance would be measured. We did not include
these any measures regarding family formation and stability in the
guidance because we had difficulty identifying any that would provide
effective incentives to states to design policies to achieve. the
objectives of TANF and for which a reliable data source existed or could
be quickly developed.   We will continue, however, to explore such measures
for the High Performance Bonus in future years and will seek advice on
this matter through the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking process.

I appreciate your support for the role of the High Performance Bonus as a
key tool in making welfare reform successful.  I remain firm in my belief
in the importance of our continuing to work with your committee in all
matters, including the development of HPB for future years, and have asked
Assistant Secretary Golden to meet with your staff in preparation for the


Notice of proposed Rulemaking.


