 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAR-1998 00:00:18.00

 SUBJECT:   HIB

 TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

"TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 This is what we are putting in the VP's briefing memo for the AFL-CIO
 tomorrow on the H-IB issue. Ceci Rouse drafted it, I edited it a bit, and
 then ran it by her again.

 If you think this isn't right, we will have a chance to brief the VP
 tomorrow on the road. You can leave me a message on my voice mail (6-5567)
 that I should call you to get recommendations on what else we should tell
 the VP, or
  or how else you recommend he respond to an HIB" question.  We'll have a
 computer on the plane, and can rewrite if needed.   Thanks!      -- Jon
 Schnur




 Q: What is the Administration's position on proposals to raise the cap on
 the number of H-IB visas granted as one strategy to alleviate the alleged
 shortage of skilled workers in the Information Technology Industry?

 A:  There is certainly a rising demand for skilled workers in many
 high-growth industries, like the information technology industry. "Our
 first priority is to help U.S. workers get the skills they need to get
 these good jobs. That's why our balanced budget last year made the
 largest investment in higher education since the original GI bill -- with
 expansion of Pell Grants, extension of Section 127 (that excludes
 employer-paid tuition assistance from income tax), and more than $30
 billion over five years for HOPE scholarships and lifetime learning tax
 credits.

 That's also why it is critical that Congress pass the G.I. bill for
 workers this spring, and why we continue to very actively look for more
 ways to expand access to quality training, education, and lifelong
 learning. That's also why I am convening a summit on lifelong learning
 later this year to bring together leaders from labor, business, education,
 and government to find new strategies to help U.S. workers get the skills
 they need; I invite you to join me in planning this summit.   Investing in
 training and education is the critical strategy to power our economic
 growth and make sure that all of our people benefit from this growth.

 Our staff is looking very carefully at the arguments being made about the
 H-IB issue.  Couldn't we bring you and industry and our people to the
 table to develop a package that could help U.S. workers and power our
 economy? For example, could we increase the cap as part of a
 comprehensive package that adhered to two principles: providing U.S.
 workers the necessary training to get good jobs and make sure the H-IB


 program protects the interests of U.S. workers?   I would welcome your
 ideas about how to make a package like this work.


 Background:     There have been increasing reports of great needs for
 skilled workers in many sectors of the economy.  While there are
 identified needs in fields ranging from truckers to welders in shipyards,
 the need has been expressed most vocally by the information technology
 industry for IT workers.  H-1B visas are one way by which companies can
 alleviate such short-term needs, allowing foreign workers in "specialty
 occupations" with a BA (or equivalent'experience) to enter jobs requiring
 a BA.  The visas are issued for a 3-year period, and almost always renewed
 for one additional 3-year period.  There is an annual cap of 65,000 such
 visas, and a substantial percentage of those receiving these visas reman
 in the U.S. permanently.    Last year was the first year that the 65,000
 cap was reached; it is estimated that the cap will be reached by May (or
 so) of this year.  There are growing calls from the IT industry in
 particular, to increase the H-1B visa cap.

 Two bills could move through Congress next month addressing this issue
 one by Senator
 Abraham, to raise the cap permanently, and a second being drafted by
 Senator Kennedy to
 increase the cap temporarily.  Both also contain placeholders for
 education or training components,
 and KennedyD,s bill provides for reforms in the HlB program designed to
 protect American workers.
 Both are discussion bills at this point and could change considerably
 before getting marked up
 next month.

 While there are estimates of large numbers of vacancies in the IT
 industry, there is some
 disagreement about the validity of these numbers and whether greater
 recruiting and training
 would enable U.S. workers to fill these jobs. The NEC, DPC, Commerce, and
 Labor strongly
 believe that we need to stress' training of U. S. workers ,rather than simply
 lifting the Hl-B caps.

 While organized labor has not yet been a vocal participant in this debate,
 they
 generally do not support bringing in foreign workers to fill high-skilled,
 high-wage American jobs.
 At the same time, they would strongly support reform of the current H-1B
 program to prevent U.S.
 employers from laying off Americans to hire foreign workers and to require
 that employers
 attest to having attempted to recruit U.S. workers before hiring foreign
 workers; and they have
 traditionally been extremely supportive of any training initiatives.
 Many of the possible H-1B
 reforms could generate disagreement and controversy among those interested
 in this issue.

 The President was asked about this yesterday at the AFI-CIO meeting and
 gave an answer
 along the lines of the Q & A above.  You will get a longer briefing memo
 on this issue next week.


