RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diane C. Regas ( CN=Diane C. Regas/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JAN-1997 15:59:11.00

SUBJECT:   Children's Health EO and Conference Call

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Diane C. Regas/OPD/EOP on 01/30/97
03:57 PM ---------------------------




Bradley M. Campbell
01/30/97 02:15:13 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         Children's Health EO and Conference Call

Attached is the children's health EO, greatly revised and scaled back, but
(hopefully) ready for circulation.  It's now on the wire to agencies but
the more formal OMB process should now begin. Y

There is a conference call to discuss initial agency comments at 5:45
today, January 30. The call in lines are 6-6755, 6-6766, 6-6777, and
6-6799. The access code is 6219.



Message Sent
TO: ____________~--~-----------------------------------------------
Diane C. Regas/OPD/EOP
HOLSTEIN E @ A1 @ CD @ LNGTWY
SHOGREN_J @ A1 @ CD @ LNGTWY
Donald R. Arbuckle/OMB/EOP
Michael A. Fitzpatrick/OMB/EOP
Carline M Jelsma/OMB/EOP
T J. Glauthier/OMB/EOP
Sally Katzen/OMB/EOP
Phyllis Kaiser-Dark/OMB/EOP
Brian J. Johnson/CEQ/EOP
Robert S. Fairweather/OMB/EOP
Ronald M. Cogswell/OMB/EOP
Alecia Ward/OMB/EOP
Robert G. Damus/OMB/EOP
McGavock D. Reed/OMB/EOP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D63lMAIL40408592G.016 to ASCII,
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


                 DISCUSSION DRAFT -- DO NOT CITE OR RELEASE


                        PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
         IN FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY ACTIONS


America's children are this country's future. Preparing our children for the 21 st century
is among our most important national priorities. To fulfill this task we must recognize
that America's children face significant and unique threats from an array of hazards. A
growing body of scientific knowledge demonstrates that children are particularly at risk
from environmental hazards:

      Children's immunological, digestive and other bodily systems are still developing,
       making them more susceptible to toxic pollutants and other environmental
       hazards;

     Children eat more food, drink more fluids; and breathe more air in proportion to
      their body weight than adults, and spend more time outside in play, so they may
      be more exposed to toxic pollutants and other environmental hazards;

     Children are less able than adults to recognize and to protect themselves from
      exposure to toxic pollutants and other environmental hazards, and

     Children face potential exposures to toxic pollutants over their entire lifetime, with
      the possibility of more significant health impacts.

Our experience tells us that children have different needs when we act to protect health
and safety:

     Children's size and weight can affect how well they are protected by safety
      features;

     Children have activity patterns that are different from those of adults, which
      affects their exposure to health and safety risks;

     Children are less able to protect themselves from risk, and less responsive to
      warning regimes.

While responsible Federal agencies consider the effect of their work on children,
existing standards were derived in many instances principally from data on adults. The
array and complexity of environmental, health, and safety threats facing children today,
and the uncertainties in the adequacy of existing protections derived principally to

DRAFT: 1.30.am.1                            1
                                                                  Hex-Dump ConversIon


protect adults, pose a significant challenge to our ability to protect our children's health
and safety.
The Federal government is responding vigorously to this challenge, acting to address
threats to children's environmental health in the new Food Quality Protection Act,
accounting for children in the development of new standards for passive restraints in
cars, and taking administrative action to protect children from tobacco, lead, and other
hazards. But we'should do more. The Federal government must establish a national
policy to protect the health of American children from environmental, health, and safety
hazards, and apply its resources, including its scientific research capabilities, in a
coordinated and efficient manner to address these threats to children.

Only by tailoring governmental actions, including the setting of health and safety
standards, to recognize and address the oftentimes greater impact that environmental
pollutants and other health and safety azards have upon the health of our children, can
we ensure our children's healthy and productive futures. The task before us is large --
developing the basic scientific knowledge of how toxic chemicals and other
environmental, health, and safety hazards may differentially impact on children may
take years. But the need to act, and to act promptly, to protect the future of our nation
cannot be disregarded.

       NOW, THEREFORE, to establish a coordinated federal strategy for the
protection of children from the risks of exposure to toxic pollutants and other
environmental, health, and safety hazards, and by the authority vested in me as
President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, it is hereby
ordered as follows:

       Section 1. Policy.

       1-101. The head of each Federal agency shall, to the greatest extent practicable,
permitted by law, and consistent with the agency's mission, establish the protection of
children from environmental, health, and safety hazards as a priority for that agency.

         1-102. The head of each Federal agency shall ensure that the potential impacts
upon children of environmental, health, or safety hazards arising from or related to the
activities of that agency are considered and addressed by that agency to the fullest
extent permitted by that agency's statutory authority.


       Section 2. Definitions.   The following definitions shall apply to this order.

      2-201. Federal agency means an Executive agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C.
105. For purposes of this order, military departments, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 102, are
covered under the auspices of the Department of Defense.

       2-202.   Significant regulatory action means any regulatory action that is likely to

DRAFT: 1.30.am.1                              2
                                                                   Hex-iJump Conversion

result in a rule that may:

       (a)    Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or
              adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy,
              productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or
              State, local, or tribal governments or communities;
       (b)    Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action
              planned or taken by another agency;
       (c)    Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or
              loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof; or
       (d)    Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the
              President's priorities, or the principles set forth in this Executive Order.

[NOTE: 2-202 is taken verbatim from EO 12866]

       Section 3. Children's Environmental Health IWG.

       3-301. Within 60 days of the signing of this order, there shall be established an
interagency working group (IWG) on Children's Health IWG, which shall have general
oversight of the implementation of this order.

        3-302. The IWG shall be comprised of representatives of Federal agencies and
White House offices with responsibility for the regulation of risks from toxic pollutants or
other environmental, health, or safety hazards, or whose activities may substantially
affect such hazards, or which conducts scientific or medical research related to such
risks or hazards. Member agencies shall include, but are not limited to, the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (CPSC); the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ); the
Department of Agriculture (USDA); the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), including, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), and the National Institutes of Health (NIH); the Department
of Justice (DOJ); the Domestic Policy Council (DPC); the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA); the Office of Management and Budget (OMS); and the Office of Science
and Technology Policy (OSTP).

      3-303. The IWG shall deveop a coordinated Federal strategy for Children's
Health and Safety, to include at least the following elements:

       (a)    Statements of guiding principles, general policy, and targeted annual
              priorities that will govern the Federal approach to achieving the goals of
              this order.
       (b)    A coordinated research agenda for the Federal government, including
              steps to implement the plan for the consolidated research database
              developed pursuant to section 4 of this order, and a preparation of a
              cross-cutting budget to accomplish this research. This agenda shall
              address future research needs, including addressing multiple exposures

D R AFT -- 1/30; 1:00 pm                     3
                                                                    Hex-Dump Ccnv0,sion


               and cumulative health risks facing infants and children. It should explore
               appropriate partnerships between the Federal government and other
               branches of government and the private, academic, and non-profit
               sectors.
       (c)     Recommendations for public outreach and information-sharing to assist
               families in evaluating risks to infants and children in making informal
               consumer choices, and to establish private-sector partnerships for
               cooperatively achieving the goals of this order. As part of this effort, the
               IWG shall publish a joint pamphlet for distribution to families assessing
               children's environmental, health, or safety threats, and providing practical
               tips for family protection and additional sources of governmental
               information.
       (d)     An identification of ten high-priority initiatives for the Federal government
               to undertake in advancing protection of children's health and safety.
       (e)   . A statement regarding the desirability of new legislation to ensure that the
               purposes of this Executive Order are carried out.

    3-304. The IWG shall be composed of the Secretary or head of each of the
member agencies, or their designees at the Assistant Secretary level or its equivalent.

        3-305. The IWG may establish subcommittees and working groups as
appropriate to assist the IWG in carrying out its obligations and responsibilities under
this order.

       3-306. The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall serve as
interim chair of the IWG with responsibility for arranging the first meeting. At the first
meeting, the IWG shall elect a permanent chair, who will serve for a period of one year.
 Subsequent chairs shall be elected by the IWG to serve for one-year terms, with no
one member agency holding the chairmanship of the IWG for more than two
consecutive one-year periods.

       3-307. The IWG shall exist for a period of four years. At least six months prior
to the expiration of that period, the member agencies shall assess the need for
continuation of the IWG or its functions, and make appropriate recommendations to the
President.

       Section 4. Research Coordination and Integration

        4-401. Within six months of the date of signature of this order, the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy and the National Science and Technology
Committee shall present to the IWG a proposed plan for establishing, maintaining, and
keeping current a consolidated research data base that lists and describes all research
conducted or funded by the Federal government that is related to adverse health effects
in children and infants resulting from exposure to toxic pollutants or other
environmental, health, or safety hazards. This plan shall include recommendations to

DR AFT -- 1/30; 1:00 pm                      4
fully integrated with, and not duplicative of, other current or planned initiatives with
respect to children's health and safety.

     4-402. The proposed plan shall promote the submission of information on
academic and other private research for inclusion in the data base.

      4-403. The plan shall include provisions to ensure that the consolidated
research data base is available to the public, to the scientific and academic
communities, and to all Federal agencies.

       Section 5. Data Needs

       5-501. Annual Report on Data Needs. The head of each agency subject to
this Executive Order shall present an annual report to the IWG on research, data, or
other information that should be developed to enhance the agency's ability to
understand, analyze, and respond to environmental, health, and safety risks to children.
 This report shall include particular data needs that have been identified in the course
of the agency's programs and activities, and shall be provided to the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy and the National Science and Technology
Committee for consideration in establishing research priorities.

       Section 6. Agency environmental, health. or safety regulations.

       6-601. For each significant regulatory action addressing the environment,
health, or safety, each agency shall provide the following information, developed as part
of the agency's decision making process (unless prohibited by law):

       (a)    An evaluation of whether the proposed regulatory action addresses an
              area in which children may be at greater risk than the general population;

       (b)    An assessment of potentially effective and reasonably feasible
              alternatives to the proposed regulatory action that have been identified by
              the agency or the public and that may be more protective of children; and

       (c)    An explanation of why the proposed regulatory action is preferable to the
              identified potential alternative(s).


       Section 7.   General Provisions.

        7-701. This order is not intended, and should not be construed to create any
right, benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or
equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or its employees.
This order shall not be construed to create any right to judicial review involving the

ORA F T -- 1/30; 1: 00 pm                    5
                                                                  f ;.;;:-Cump Conv~,$ion


compliance or noncompliance with this order by the United States, its agencies, its
officers, or any other person.

       7-702. Federal agencies should implement this order consistent with, and to the
extent permitted by, existing law.

       7-703. This order shall be effective immediately and shall continue to be in
effect until revoked.




The White House
_ _ _ _ _ _ , 1997




ORA F T -- 1/30; 1 :00 pm                  6


