RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAR-1998 13:24:38.00

SUBJECT:   Unz update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Unz memo did not go to POTUS on Saturday, and won't until after POTUS
returns.  The purpose of this note is to bring you up to spead, and get
your guidance on how to proceed.  I believe the delay will lead to furrher
revisions in the memo, and want your counsel on how best to proceed.

Background on the delay:   After we made the few changes Saturday morning,
Leg. affairs expressed concern that we had not completed Congressional
consultations (which are going on this week--this afternoon we are meeting
with Feinstein and Boxer's staff, tomorrow with Becerra, Hinajosa and
others from the Hispanic caucus) .

I don't know if it was Larry or Janet who' weighed in--earlier in the week,
Janet had raised a little concern about the memo going in before the Hill
consultations had been completed, but her· plan at the time was that we
simply not tell Hill folks that the memo had been completed; she did not
suggest postponing sending the memo.  In any event, Maria was consulted
about the delay and was ok with it.

I was notified late Saturday that the memo did not go, and got the
background on the reasons this morning.

The push for revisions begins:  In the meantime, Mike Smith paged me
yesterday and indicated that Riley has additional thoughts, both about how
we draw on Lau, and on the 3-year time limit. We didn't discuss this in
detail--I'll need to get back to him.

I believe this delay will make it difficult, if not impossible, to avoid
further modifications to the memo--and I expect we will see a concerted
effort to modify the 3-year time limit to learn English, or to propose
additional options on how that should be addressed.

Moving forward:  If you and Bruce are willing to include additional
options in the memo, then it may be best to bring everyone back for
another meeting just to focus on that issue, so long as everyone
understands that the option Bruce favors will stay in the memo.  Are you
ok with this approach, or do you have another idea of how to proceed?

Three years to learn English policy issue:  Finally, with regard to
Unz--as I reflected on this over the weekend, I believe that there are
some dangers with the approach we have recommended--3 years to learn
English, and schools can't use fed. bilingual ed. funds to keep teaching
the kid English after that.  the main problem is that we leave the schools
entirely off the hook--they can take the position that they tried for 3
years, the kid didn't learn English, and now the kid's on his own.   I
suspect this approach would violate the Lau guidelines, which require that
if one approach doesn't work, another one be tried.

An alternative--which I believe we could recommend without losing the
·

message we need--is one that would place the accountability burden on the
schools. This is more like the one we've attributed to Riley and Maria in
the memo.  The message: "Kids must learn English within 3 years, and we
must hold schools accountable for accomplishing this." The policy:
A goal of learning English within 3 years
A requirement that district's test kids English proficiency and monitor
progress annually (the testing requirement will drive our friends in the
advocacy community and on the Hill nuts)
A requirement to provide progress report to parents each year, and to show
how the kid's instructional program will help them meet the 3-year goal.
If the kid is not making adequate progress, the district has to tell the
parent what it will do differently, and then do it
A requirement that the district provide intensive help to kids who have
not met the goal by the end of the 3rd year.
School districts with poor records of helping kids learn English within 3
years would risk losing continuation funding, and would lose points in the
competition for subsequent bilingual education funding.

I think this approach would support the public message we want.  It makes
us unambiguously for insisting that kids learn English.   It would not
leave us vunerable to the charge that we are hurting kids, while it would
leave us strong on school accountability.  It would probably get strong
support internally from Maria, Mickey et. al .. I think Karen Skelton--who
wants to make.sure we are strong on English and strong on changing
bilingual education--would probably support this as well, though I have
not discussed it with her.

At the same this approach will cause flack within the advocacy community
(which doesn't believe in timelines and doesn't want us to say anything
about bilingual education until after the Unz vote) and therefore, in all
liklihood, among members of the Hispanic Caucus.

What do you think? I don't want to raise it unless you think Bruce would
buy it.


