RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN:Julie A. Fernandes/OU:OPD/O:EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-MAR-1998 18:01:52.00

SUBJECT:     H1B meeting w/AFL

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN:Elena Kagan/OU:OPD/O:EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Peter G. Jacoby ( CN:Peter G. Jacoby/OU:WHO/O:EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN:Laura Emmett/OU:WHO/O:EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
I attended the meeting with the AFL today.      This is where we are:

1.      AFL has been approached by Kennedy to get their support for his
bill (n.b., the Kennedy announcement is now set for Thursday).  They are
concerned about raising the cap, but don't really know where they are on
whether to support the Kennedy legislation. They don't think that they
could endorse raising the cap without a serious, large-scale training
initiative (with a big incumbent worker piece).  They support reforms to
theH1B program, but don't know if they would support a bill that had the
reforms, raised the cap, but didn't have a big training piece.  However,
their affiliates have been signaling that reforms to the H1B program are
as important as training.  This may be particularly true in light of the
GAO report (b/c they see that if employers have to do more to target use
of visas to a real shortage and there is no shortage, there will be less
use of foreign workers). Also, they noted that some in their constituency
will likely oppose any raising of the cap, regardless of what it is
packaged with.

2.      AFL is interested in bringing the labor unions into some kind of
partnership with industry and educators to better address training (both
for new workers and, more importantly, for incumbent workers).  This could
either be by building on the regional skill alliance idea that the NEC
group has been working on, or could be a separate venture. Sally is going
to convene a meeting next week with AFL folks to talk about what role they
could play (with others) in either model.

3.      Sally told them that we would share the POTUS statement with
them after it is finalized, but before it is released (if there is a
window), and asked that they share any statements of theirs with us.

4.      It appears that Feinstein has been lobbied hard by the IT folks
and is "concerned" about the proposed reforms to the H1B program.  Labor
is getting her some paper on why the reforms are a good idea.

That's it.

Julie


