RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane (,CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 31-MAR-1998 21:10:15.00

SUBJECT:   Welfare-to-Work Data Collection

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Apologies in advance --- what you're about to read is somewhat long and
complicated, but we really want your feedback!
Over the last several weeks, HHS and DOL, prompted largely by OMB and us,
have begun to work more closely together on developing a coordinated
approach to WtW evaluation and data collection.  This has resulted in a
much improved evaluation strategy, for which HHS is ready to issue an
RFP.  However, the agencies are at an impasse on one, particular issue
related to data collection (see below).  HHS needs to issue the evaluation
RFP by tomorrow in order to get the money out the door by the end of the
fiscal year.  OMB has used their control over the evaluation funds to
force his coordination and is not inclined to let the RFP go until
agreement is reached on data collection. We want to get your reaction to
the data collection issue in hopes that we can weigh in to push this issue
forward.  Barbara Chow has a call set up with Olivia (and we think Ray
Uhalde) tomorrow at 11.

Background
The BBA gives DOL responsibility for administering the WTW program, but
gives HHS responsibility for evaluation and data collection on
participants.  The $3 billion provided through WTW are split 75/25 between
formula and competitive grants.
Formula grants are disbursed to states,' which in turn allocate 85 percent
of funds by formula to PICs who administer the programs locally in
consultation with the Governor.
competitive grants are awarded directly to PICs, political subdivisions of
states, and other private entities who must apply in conjunction with PICs
and in consultation with the Governor.

The current dispute concerns which department has the authority and
responsibility for data collection on competitive grantees. The statute
clearly gives DOL authority to collect financi'al data from both formula
and competitive grantees.

What data is to be collected?
There is general agreement that neither the WtW data collection
requirements, nor their interaction with the TANF data collection, were
carefully thought through in drafting the WtW part of BBA.   The WtW law
listed four types of individual participant level information to be
collected for WtW participants (basically about WtW activities, costs,


what kind of 'employment they got, and wage levels).  However, this got
embedded in the overall TANF data collection section (the infamous section
411(a) that lists 17 types of information required from states on TANF
participants, which has now mushroomed into the 160+ that we've heard so
much about) .                 '

There is also 'a general sense that we do not really need to know all the
TANF information about the WtW grantees. particularly the competitive
grantees. However, OMB and DOL are assuming we can't do anything about
this without a legislative fix.   HHS believes we might be able to, if we
accept their interpretation of the legal argument below. We think it is
definitely work considering a way to pare back the data collection for
competitive grantees if there is a way to do that within current law and
without causing an explosion on the Hill (OMB has pushed to resolve this
internally before going to the Hill). While a legislative clean up on the
data issues may be useful, it could also put us in an awkward position in
terms of reopening the TANF data collection issues.

What is the argument?
Section 411(a) opens by saying:
"Each eligible State shall collect on a monthly basis, and report to the
Secretary on a quarterly basis, the following disaggregated case record
information on the families receiving assistance under the State program
funded under this part:" then goes on to list 17 types of information.
WtW added as #18, "With respect to families participating in a program
operated with funds provided under section 403 (a) (5) [WtW) " and goes on to
list 4 types of information,

HHS argues that competitive grants are not part of the "state programs
funded under this part" and therefore, HHS cannot require the states to
gather data from the competitive grantees. This interpretatfon also leads
them to believe that 411(a) does not even apply to the competitive
grantees. DOL argues that the state program implies the entire WtW
program--both formula and competitive. We have asked Rob Weiner to look
at these two conflicting interpretations. OMB feels strongly that we
should treat competitive and formula grantees the same.

Options
1) The main option under consideration, and preferred by OMB,   is to have
formula and competitive grantees in each state submit WtW participant data
(4 items) to a state ageny designated by the governor, who would then
merge this data with TANF data to extract the other 17 items (160
elements) on these participants   (it's worth noting that this merge will
not be simple or clean for a variety of reasons). This state agency
(either'workforce or welfare) would then submit rolled up data to HHS.
This relieves the WtW grantees from having to collect all the,additional
TANF data and relieves HHS from having to roll up data from hundreds of
competitive grantees. However, it shifts the burden to the states who are
already unhappy about TANF data collection and are not thrilled about the
WtW structure either. 'HHS does not believe they have the legal authority
to require states to play this data collection role   (see above) ,  HHS
also has a more political concern about how states will react to being
required to collect data from competitive grantees.

While we're waiting to see how Rob Weiner rules on the legal issue, we
also think the political concern is worth considering seriously.  Is the
cost/pain of imposing these data requirements on states and competitive
grantees worth it--do we really need to know all the TANF information
about the competitive grantees?                ...


2) A possible alternative would be to collect only a subset of the 17 TANF
data items, along with the 4 WtW items, from competitive grantees.
Potentially this could be done by accepting HHS' interpretation that
411(a) does not apply to the competitive grantees, but DOL still has
authority to ask them for any reasonable -information as a condition of
getting a grant.   HHS would say they still don't have authority to compel
states to collect and merge the WtW data from competitive grantees.
However, we could give states the option to do this.   If they refused,
then the competitive grantees would submit directly to either HHS or DOL
HHS will also say they don't have the resources to collect information
directly from the competitive grantees.

One possible sweetner is to offer technical assistance to the competitive
grantees to help them gather and submit the data--either to states or the
feds.  Perhaps DOL or HHS could hire a contractor to do this, using-WtW
evaluation funds or some of the competitive grant money.

It would be helpful to have your general reaction to the following:
1. How important is it to treat competitive and formula grantees alike?
2. How important is it to collect all TANF data elements on WtW grantees?
(barring a legislative fix, there is less flexibility to pare these back
for formula grantees than for competitive grantees)
3. What do you think about a future legislative fix that tries to
rationalize the data collection for WtW grantees (both competitive and
formula)?
4. How much do we want to ask the states to do in terms of merging and
submitting data for competitive grantees? (OMB, HHS, and DOL agree that
under Option 1 above we would/could ask them to do this for formula
grantees)
5. Would it be OK to check with Hill on intent and whether they have any
strong feelings about various approaches?
6.  Finally, would you support asking OMB to let HHS to release the
evaluation RFP tomorrow even while some of the data collection issues are
being resolved?


