RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 31-MAR-1998 20:16:26.00

SUBJECT:   New Unz memo

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a revised Unz mem9, incorporating the approach we discussed
earlier.   I don't know if you had a chance to review the materials after
we talked- -and whether you and I were correct' in our assumption that you
wouldn't be happy with it.

Here are a couple of things to keep in mind:

1. The new approach--less hard edge than before--is one that everyone who
has been through all of the Unz discussions, including particularly the
Congressional ones in the last week, is ,convinced is the right way to go.
The approach in our earlier memo, proposing specific changes in federal
programs as well as a 3-year goal for learning English, would cause us a
lot of trouble in many quarters.

2. You may recall that the three people most consistently for the mend it
don't end it and 3-year goal have been you, myself and Karen.  Karen has
been insistent that we not leave ourselves exposed on the center/right
when we oppose Unz.  She and I have talked extensively--and
privately--about the direction that is now incorporated in the memo, and
we are both convinced that this newer approach works well politically.

3. A couple of other changes in the structure of the memo:    (1) I've
incorporated the discussion about the educational and legal problems with
Unz into the recommendation to oppose Unz~-it makes for a tigher argument
in support of the recommendation compared with the earlier memo.    (2) In
the past week, Riley and all of his lawyers got together and agreed on'a
single, clear story line on Unz,   federal case law, and the odds of
litigation if Unz is enacted. I've used their new version--now that they
agree on what it is.

I'm going to look this over again tonight.  I need to get it around
tomorrow, so we can get this put to bed, hopefull before AF1 lands.=================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o 00:00:00.00
TEXT:
Unable to convert 'ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D60]MAIL478847989.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S043740S0000010A0201000000020S000000B66B00000002000002007A8F41946A30D8B2B2
1C2FOCCCES1SF8ECC688F418CD9E92S3132FSACFF839EB4EC4A9872776E799B034FEE36FE88E1F
C97B7DCSOOCEC8S7932S3DFSOB4F4CFOSB763B2762C4F30CB46DSF6SB27BSDSFDESC48FADDCC23
E13670SEE8073SCD6DA28SF1046344D29F92S00S6B3BA778ED36A66E2F77680C38C6986ABBF3S3
99SD9290B6423FODDF3CC6639080ESB423933B109984B6098F0607SC180EBF724B99FBOAOOA82S
91BSBE6DC3B08BOCOC232EFSEEA941S4EASD72SF0437A63ABD3S6B9AID08FB3E991D2FE9402068
618C78ASAAE17DE1AFS2D482FOSCSCS14S32AS94EC464B199AD7ASF1BEBOS27SA8A2SDBOFAOCFA
D012D7A20ABEABBCEFCB8FE14910S0E7DF9EF9SBB2FF8DCC2B4B3B441A4819199BE8SSF3S97B46
3ESE0637CC36E972D6DCED1AD8ESA6471DFCESC8936AF9F3097D738SOD310F1AF44096147FES98
7D1B381739S1CBA14EC68949S8EB4EAE6CS6S0S832F340S240EB2FS97SFC2608446017S00C8124
                                                                        .      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                         March 31, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR tHE PRESIDENT

FROM:                 SECRETARY RILEY
                      BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:              California Proposition 227 (Unz Initiative) to End Bilingual Education


         On June 2, California voters will consider Proposition 227, otherwise known as the Unz
Initiative, which proposes to eliminate all bilingual education. This is California's third
potentially divisive race-related initiative in four years, following on the heels of Proposition
187, which barred public benefits for illegal immigrants, and Proposition 209, which ended
affirmative action.

          Polls show that the initiative is popular and is likely to pass, although a strong
opposition campaign could make this election close. Many Latino voters currently favor the
initiative, although the polls show that Latino support has declined considerably as voters
become more familiar with the details of the proposal. Latino activists are strongly opposed to
Unz, and are looking to the White House to support their efforts to defeat it.

       Over the past several months DPC and Education Department staff worked with Maria
Echaveste, Mickey Ibarra, Karen Skelton, and Janet Murguia to study the Unz Initiative,
including extensive outreach to both opponents and supporters in California, in the Congress and
among the advocacy community. Despite legitimate concerns over the effectiveness of some
bilingual education programs, your advisors strongly believe that the Unz initiative is bad
education policy and will harm students who need help the most.

        We recommend that you publicly oppose the Unz Initiative because it deprives local
educators of the ability to make educationally sound choices about how to meet the needs of
limited English proficient children they serve and almost certainly will result in widespread
violations of federal civil rights law. Your opposition to Unz should be coupled with a
statement of the principles you support for strengthening programs to help Limited English
Proficient students become proficient in English.
                                                                             4UIOmate~ Records Management System
A. Overview of the Unz Initiative
                                                                                     ex-Dump Conversion

        This initiative, authored and backed by Silicon Valley millionaire Ron Unz, is designed to
end all bilingual education programs in California. More specifically, it would:

      Require that all public school instruction be conducted in English.
      Permit this requirement to be waived only if parents or guardians can show that the child
       already knows English, has special needs, or would learn English faster through an
       alternative instructional technique.
      Provide initial placement for Limited English Proficient (LEP) students in "sheltered
       English immersion" programs for one year. Instruction in these programs would be
       conducted in English, with some accommodations in the curriculum to take into account
       the limited English language skills of the students.
      Appropriate $50 million per year over 10 years to fund adult education programs
       designed to teach English to LEP adults who in tum pledge to provide English language
       tutoring to LEP students.
      Make teachers, administrators and school board members subject to suits and personally
       liable for failure to implement the provisions of the initiative.

        Unz and other backers of this initiative regard the existing system of bilingual education
in the state as a complete failure. They argue that because bilingual education relies so heavily
on use of the students' native language and only slowly introduces English, the approach delays
or prevents, rather than promotes, the acquisition of English. Further, they point out that
although California's bilingual education law expired a decade ago, the legislature has been
unable to enact legislation to reform a broken program. This initiative, they argue, will break
the legislative impasse and dramatically change bilingual education policy for the better.

B. Bilingual Education in California

       Demographics. There are approximately 1.3 million Limited English Proficient (LEP)
students in California, approximately one quarter of California's K-12 students. This number
has nearly doubled in less than a decade, and represents some 43% of the national total. Seventy
nine percent of California's LEP students are native Spanish speakers. Hispanics have a 50%
dropout rate, and by most indicators their academic performance lags behind most other
population groups in the state.

        Educational Services. LEP students receive a wide variety of services intended to help
them learn English and academic subjects. In 1997, only about 30% received what is
conventionally considered bilingual education -- programs which make significant use of the .
student's primary language to teach academics while phasing in ever greater amounts of English
language instruction. More than half participate in specially designed instructional programs

                                                 2
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

that help students learn English through a combination of approaches such as direct instruction in
grammar, vocabulary and communications, while teaching other subjects in a way designed to be
accessible to LEP students. (The Unz Initiative would eliminate these programs as well as
conventional bilingual programs.) Approximately 16% of all LEP students an! not receiving any.
language instruction services at all.

        California Legal Framework. The legal framework for providing services to LEP
students in California is murky. California's Bilingual Education Act sunseted in 1987, but the
State Board of Education regulations implementing the act have remained in effect. Under this
framework, school districts are required to help students become fluent in English and competent
in other academic subjects, and are given a significant amount of flexibility in determining how
to achieve these goals. Neither bilingual education nor any other specific approach to teaching
LEP students is required.

         There have been a number of unsuccessful attempts in the past decade to enact new
legislation, but bilingual education reformers and advocates have been unable to agree on an
approach. There has been a fresh attempt over the past month to craft compromise legislation,
partly to take the steam out ofUnz and to give Unz opponents something to support. This
effort, however, is likely to end in failure.

         Early in March the State Board of Education took the first step toward eliminating the
state bilingual education regulations. This process should be completed shortly before the vote
on Unz. The effect of this action will be to eliminate any state requirement for the provision of
specific services to LEP students, and to give local school districts even greater flexibility in this
area.

II.    Political Context

         The Unz initiative is currently the most serious threat to bilingual education, but it is not
likely to be the last. Earlier this year Speaker Gingrich proposed eliminating bilingual
education, and some conservative education experts (~, Diane Ravitch) have also called for its
elimination. Last week, Rep. DeLay introduced a bill that would eliminate the federal bilingual
e~ucation program, and House RepUblicans have included a $75 million recision of FY98
funding for bilingual education in the emergency supplemental bill. Especially if Unz passes,
we are likely to see energized opposition to the federal program, and increased opposition in
other states and localities.

         The Unz initiative presents a political dilemma in California. If we oppose' it, we
risk alienating a majority of California Anglo voters, If we fail to oppose it, we risk alienating a
vocal and increasingly influential group of Latino leaders, and possibly Latino voters,

       Current polls show that a large majority of California Anglo voters support Unz: For
Anglos, bilingual education may become a hot button issue similar to immigrant services and


                                                  3
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


affirmative action. In contrast, Latino voters are split on the issue. While many continue to
support Unz largely out of frustration at the public schools' failure to help their children, polls
show that Latino support is eroding as they become more aware of the particulars of the
initiative. And the polls tended to underestimate Latino opposition to Prop. 187 and Prop. 209.

        Latino activists and elected officials oppose Unz. To some of the Latino leaders, Unz is
a litmus issue, like Propositions 187 and 209. Latino leaders are looking to the White House to
become actively involved in the opposition to Unz, and are fearful that we will choose to sit on
the sidelines.

         More organizations and elected officials are taking positions on Unz. The California
education community -- including the California Teachers Association and the California
School Boards Association -- is strongly opposed to Unz. Key Democratic officeholders
(including Sen. Boxer, Rep. Becerra and most Democrats in the California delegation, State
Superintendent Delaine Eastin, and Speaker Villaraigosa) have also announced their opposition
to the Unz initiative. All three Democratic gubernatorial candidates have come out against Unz.
 Sen. Feinstein has not taken a public stance yet, though she appears likely to support Unz. A
list of organizations, elected officials, and other leaders that have taken positions on Unz is
attached.

        The Republican state party has supported Unz, though many Republican officials,
including Gov. Wilson, have not yet taken a position. Dan Lungren has not taken a position yet,
but has recently said that the recent action by the State Board of Education has eliminated the
need for Unz. There is always a chance that White House opposition to Unz could polarize the
situation and push Gov. Wilson and other Republicans to support Unz, but at least some
Republican leaders are afraid to support another initiative viewed as anti-Hispanic.

       The political dilemma can be resolved with a "Mend it / Don't End it" response.
We believe the best approach to this issue is to strike a middle ground by admitting that bilingual
education needs mending, but asserting that Unz is not the way to do it. More specifically, we
can:
      Start by reiterating the overriding importance of helping every child become proficient in
       English;
      Oppose Unz on the merits because it is too extreme;
      Remind voters what we are for, including both our overall approach to strengthening
       public education and our Hispanic initiative;                                         .
      Articulate the fundamental principles that you believe should be used by local
       communities to strengthen their efforts to educate LEP students. These principles include
       helping children become proficient in English as quickly as possible, holding schools
       accountable for results, providing local flexibility, and emphasizing quality in any
       approach used.




                                                 4
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
111_   Specific Recommendations

I. Oppose Unz Initiative on educational and legal grounds.

        Educational. While evaluations of bilingual education in Cali톐ornia and
elsewhere have identified some promising efforts, few believe that the services now
provided to LEP students are effective on a large scale basis. In many cases,
shortages of qualified teachers and poor implementation of limited the effectiveness of
existing programs. However, these bilingual education programs should be "mended,
not ended." A one-size-fits-all State prescription for how to educate limited English
proficient children and demanding that it be done within one year will, in our view, be
counter-productive to achieving the goal of helping LEP students learn English and
participate effectively in classrooms where English is the language of instruction.
Experience and research, including a 1997 report of the National Academy of Sciences,
indicate that no one approach is the answer for all limited English proficient children.

         Rather -- whether the approach is bilingual education, English as a second
language, structured immersion, or some variation or hybrid of them -- the success of
programs turns on the quality and commitment of the school and teacher. The Unz
Initiative is likely to impair chances for success by limiting the discretion of schools and
teachers to determine what works best for their LEP students. Infact, the Unz Initiative
is an extreme form of overregulation that prevents teachers and parents from exercising
common sense and professional judgment of how to serve individual children.
Exceptions can be made only by bureaucrats far removed from the classroom, and
personal liability of teachers increases the prospect of court intrusions in educational
matters to new and alarming levels.

        A National Academy of Sciences study released March 18 shows that LEP
children with no English proficiency are best taught to read English by first being taught
reading in their native language, if teachers and instructional materials in their native
language are available. Thus, while a structured English immersion approach may be
effective for some limited English proficient children, it is likely to be ineffective for
many others. In addition, our experience in administering the Bilingual Education Act
and in reviewing programs for possible violations of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
indicates that one year of special instruction -- whether in Bilingual Education or an
English immersion approach -- rarely is sufficient to enable a child who starts the
program with almost no proficiency in English to become proficient enough to
participate in regular classes.

        Legal. Based on the educational problems described above, the Unz Initiative
implicates federal civil rights laws. In the seminal 1974 case of Lau v. Nichols, the
Supreme Court interpreted Title VI of the Civil Rights Act to require school districts to
take steps to ensure that national origin minority students with limited English


                                             5
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

proficiency can effectively participate in the regular educational program. Similarly, the
Equal Educational Opportunity Act, enacted in 1974, requires public educational
agencies to take appropriate action to
overcome language barriers that impede student participation in the instructional
programs. Neither Lau nor the subsequent cases addressing Title VI or the Equal
Educational Opportunity Act mandate a particular approach to meeting these needs,
but they require that sound educational approaches be implemented and evaluated.

        Assuming that some educational experts will vouch for the soundness of the
sheltered English immersion approach mandated by the Unz Initiative, we do not
believe that a legal challenge asserting thatthe Unz Initiative on its face violates Title VI
or the Equal Educational Opportunity Act would succeed. However, the Unz Initiative
is certain to cause widespread violations of Title VI and the Equal Educational
Opportunity Act if it is interpreted and applied in accordance with its intent to eliminate
the choices of local educators when providing the appropriate instruction for limited
English proficient students. Realistically, the only way that widespread violations will
be avoided is if the State or local educational agencies broadly use loopholes in the
Proposition to extend services well beyond a year and to provide bilingual education for
students who need it.

       It is evident that the Unz Initiative inevitably will create legal confrontations
between California agencies and this Department, as well as the Department of Justice,
over violations of civil rights laws and will divert resources and attention that should be
focused on educating children to investigations and litigation.

        Recommendation: For these reasons we recommend that you or another senior
Administration official (the Vice President or Secretary Riley) announce the Administration's
opposition to the Unz initiative within the next 2 weeks. Taking a position soon will allow us
to frame the debate and set a constructive tone, rather than get sucked into an already
inflammatory debate. We could tum this initiative into an opportunity to fit bilingual education
into our overall framework for ensuring effective education in the 21st century.

___Agree _ _ _Disagree - - -Discuss Further


2. Couple opposition to Unz with a clear statement of how local school districts can
strengthen education for LEP students.

        In accord with our recommendation for a "mend, don't end" approach to bilingual
education, we believe that opposition to Unz should be coupled with a strong statement
recognizing the importance of helping LEP students learn English and succeed, and a set of
principles that should guide local efforts to strengthen rather than end these programs. The
intent here is to underscore that while there is a place for bilingual education (and other ways to
         ,
help LEP students become proficient in English), bilingual education programs in particular and

                                                6
                                                                      .            Hex-Dump Conversion
the schools that serve LEP students must do a better job.

         Specifically, we recommend the following principles:
        LEP students must become proficient in English as quickly as possible. This is a
universal goal--shared especially by parents and students who have come to this country for
greater opportunity and who are eager to fully participate in the life of their community and
country.. Yet one of the most frequent criticisms of bilingual education programs is that they
are open-ended--that they prolong the time it takes for students to learn English. School districts
should establish c'lear goals that will tell parents how quickly they can expect their children to
master English and to participate in regular classrooms where English is the language of
instruction. Participation in bilingual education should not be open-ended or never-ending.

         Federally funded bilingual education programs are required to ensure that students master
English within 3-5 years. You could challenge every district to meet that standard, and urge
them to do better. You could also direct Secretary Riley to develop guidelines for local school
districts reflecting the best knowledge of how quickly LEP students can be expected to become
proficient in English, and identifying approaches, strategies and programs that can help shorten
the time it takes.

         Local school districts must be accountable for performance and results. School
districts must be held accountable for helping students become proficient in English as rapidly as
possible. They should report publicly how well they are meeting the timelines they have
established. They should test students periodically for English proficiency (as well as
achievement in other subjects) to determine if they are making adequate progress, and to provide
additional services or take other corrective actions as appropriate when students are not making
adequate progress. School districts should evaluate their bilingual education programs regularly
as well. If a program is not helping its students progress rapidly enough, the school district
should ,strengthen it, or use another approach research shows will work.

       There must be local flexibility.   As discussed above, no one-size-fits-all
prescription for how to educate limited English proficient children will work. Rather
than state mandates that either prescribe or proscribe particular approaches, local
schools must have the flexibility to design programs that meet its particular needs, mix
of students and resources. So long as the goal is clear--that students learn English as
rapidly as possible--and there is accountability for results, parents and educators should
be free to work together to fashion programs that work for them.

        The focus must be on strengthening quality, regardless of approach. The research
on instruction for LEP students does not identify any approach (~ bilingual education, English
immersion, English as a Second Language, or dual-language immersion) as particularly effective.
 Rather, it suggests that effective programs have well-prepared teachers who know how to teach
reading and who are knowledgeable about second-language acquisition; provide students with a
challenging curriculum and high academic standards; and regularly assess student progress and
make adjustments in the instructional program accordingly. In short, ifLEP students are to learn

                                                 7
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

English and succeed in school, they must be in schools that work for all students--schools with
high standards, good teachers, smaller classes, challenging curriculum and accountability for
results. Because of this, any discussion of the steps required to strengthen local quality provides
an opportunity to discuss your overall agenda for strengthening public schools

___Agree _ _---,Disagree ___Discuss Further




                                                 8
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


   Elected Officials, Associations, Activists are Taking positions on Unz:

Oppose Unz:
      Senator Barbara Boxer
     Lt. Gov. Grey Davis
      Congressman Xavier Becerra
      Congressman Cal Dooley
     Congressman Bob Filner
      Congressman Lucile Roybal-Allard
      Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren
      Congresswoman Ellen Tauscher
     Congressman Vic Fazio
      Congressman Marty Martinez
     Delaine Eastin, Superintendent of Public Instruction
      Assemblyman Cruz Bustamante (former Speaker)
      Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa
      Senator President John Burton
      Supervisor Gloria Molina
      CTA
      MALDEF
      Republican Assemblyman Bill Leonard
      Republican Assemblyman Rod Pacheco (only R Latino Assemblyman)
      CABE

Support Unz:
     Ron Unz
     Gloria Matta Tuchman
     Jaime Escalante                         ,(
     Fernando Vega
     Mayor Richard Riordan
     Darrell Issa, Republican Senate Candidate opposing Barbara Boxer




                                     9
 II




