RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Lowell A. Weiss ( CN;Lowell A. Weiss/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO ]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-APR-1998 09:56:30.00

SUBJECT:   radio address

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 4/3/98 9:30am
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION
April 3, 1998
        Good morning.   The First Lady and I have just returned, exhausted
but exhilarated, from our trip to Africa.   I know that many of you
traveled along with us day-by-day via the Internet and television, but I
wish every American could have seen, up-close, the renewed hope and
restored pride that is evident in the six countries we visited. We saw
parents building futures where their children will be free from want, free
from injustice, free from disease, and free to go'as far as their
God-given talents will allow.

        This morning, I want to report on the progress we are making in
our own country to free children from two of the greatest health and
safety threats they face: the cruel and deadly lure of smoking and the
lethal combination of drinking and driving.

        Three years ago, appalled by how many children were becoming
addicted to cigarettes each year, the Vice President and I committed this
Administration to stopping the sale and marketing of cigarettes to
children. Today, thanks to these efforts and the persistence of state
Attorneys General, the public health community, and leaders in Congress,
we have the best opportunity ever to pass comprehensive anti-smoking
legislation that will save millions of our children from a premature,
painful, and very preventable death.

         This week, in an historic and resounding 19-to-1 vot, a key
Senate committee gave its stamp of approval to comprehensive legislation
sponsored by Senator John McCain, a Republican, and Senator Fritz
Hollings, a Democrat, that would cut youth smoking by half over the next
decade.  This bill represents a dramatic step forward.  It would raise the
price of cigarettes, give the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco
products, ban advertising aimed at children, and protect tobacco farmers.

        We still have work to do on this legislation. Above all, we need
to put in place tough penalties that will cost the tobacco industry if it
continues to sell cigarettes to young people.  This week, the Centers for
Disease Control released a disturbing report that found that more than a
third of teenagers in the U.S. now smoke.  It is time to hold tobacco
companies accountable:  Reducing youth smoking must be everybodyO,s bottom
line.



        LetO,s remember:  This is not about politics, or money, or seeking
revenge against the tobacco industry. WeO,re not trying to put tobacco
companies out of business. We want to put them'out of the business of
selling cigarettes to kids.  This weekO,s progress in the Senate shows we
have real momentum in both parties to do just that.

        Unfortunately, this week Congress took a step backward on efforts
to cut down on drunk driving, a horror that has shaken nearly every
American community.   Republican leaders in the House blocked a full vote
on an important measure to encourage states to adopt a stricter definition
of drunk driving.   I urge the House leadership to reconsider its action.
A stricter definition of drunk driving will not prevent adults from
drinking responsibly, but it will save thousands of lives.

        There are fewer than 75 days remaining on CongressO,s legislative
calendar. But as we saw this week in the Senate, when we set aside
partisan differences and keep our eyes on the prize of dramatically
improving our childrenO,s health, we can make remarkable progress in
record time.  There are still many issues to be worked out and many long
nights ahead, but we have within our grasp one of the most important
public health victories our nation has ever achieved.  Thanks for
listening.

# # #


