RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-APR-1998 16:30:53.00

SUBJECT:   what the no-liability crowd is saying

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Senate Commerce Committee's National
                    Tobacco Legislation


SAVE LIVES, NOT TOBACCO
The Coalition for Accountability
http://www.savelives.org
April 6, 1998

  On Wednesday, April 1, 1998, the Senate Commerce Committee, chaired by
  John McCain (R-AZ)
. voted out its version of the deal between the tobacco industry and some
  state attorneys general.
  While this bill, S. 1415, raises the price of tobacco products higher than
  the deal and takes away
  some hurdles to FDA regulatory authority, it closely resembles the
  discredited industry deal and falls
  far short of the principles and goals of Save Laves, Not Tobacco and other
  public health and
  consumer groups.

Most disturbing are the massive and unprecedented special protections from
legal liability that the
industry would be granted under the bill, which should be known as the
"Tobacco Industry
Protection Act." Major problems include:

A Cap on Industry's Annual Civil Liability

The Commerce bill would cap the tobacco industry's total liability for all
civil damages and penalties
for all past and future wrongs to just $6.5 billion per year. The,U.S.
Treasury Department estimates
that the economic costs alone of tobacco related illness is $130 billion a
year. A $6.5 billion cap
limits the industry's liability to 5 cents on the dollar. Despite claims
by proponents of the cap that is
not immunity at all, this cap gives tobacco companies 95% immunity.

Total Protection for Parent Corporations

While the tobacco subsidiaries get 95% immunity, their parent corporations


get 100% protection
from all civil damages and penalties. Under the bill, no health-related
civil suits against tobacco
parent corporations or foreign affiliates are allowed. Thus, domestic
subsidiaries are protected by
the $6.5 billion cap, and all other assets of these multinational
conglomerates are shielded entirely
from liability for past and future conduct.   [Cynthias: What does this
mean, if anything?]

Preemption of State Law

S. 1415 preempts state tort laws, and it severely limits enforcement of
state and local consumer
protection, racketeering and anti-tobacco laws. The effect of this broad
preemption will be to freeze
state and local regulatory initiatives and make it harder for state and
local officials to enforce the law.
[Where are we on this?]

Weak Youth Smoking Penalties

The so-called "lookback" penalties against the tobacco industry aimed at
reducing youth smoking
are very weak, as these penalties are capped at $3.5 billion a year --
equal to only 15 cents a pack.
Worse, the Commerce bill fails to target the penalties company-by-company,
so there is no real
incentive for companies to meet the targets.

Low Price Increases and Taxpayer Subsidies

Most health experts agree that the best way to reduce youth nicotine
addiction is to raise prices
sharply. The Commerce bill calls for a $1.10 increase over five years,
just half of the $2 price hike
the National Academy of Sciences called for years ago. At a minimum, the
price increase should be
$1.50 over three years to reduce both youth and adult smoking rates and
save more lives.

While the tobacco lobbyists claim the Commerce bill will drive them to
bankruptcy, the bill's special
protections will let the industry laugh all the way to the bank. The
public and members of Congress
should not be fooled into giving Big Tobacco this sweetheart deal that
protects them from being held
fully accountable for past, present and future harm caused by their acts.

Anti-Immunity ,Resolution

On March 31, 79 Senators voted "Yes" to the non-binding "sense of the
Senate" amendment to the
Budget Resolution expressing opposition to giving any immunity to tobacco
companies.

The 19 Senators who voted AGAINST the amendment   (i.e.,   for immunity) were:

Bennet (R-UT), Burns (R-MT), Campbell (R-CO), Coats (R-IN), Cochran
(R-MS), Enzi


(R-WY), Faircloth (R-NC), Ford (D-KY), Gorton (R-WA), Hagel (R-NE), Hatch
(R-UT), Helms
(R-NC), Hollings (D-SC), Inhofe (R-OK), Jeffords (R-VT) , Lott (R-MS),
McConnell (R-KY),
Sessions (R-AL) , and Stevens (R-AK).

Two Senators didn't vote: Hutchinson (R-AR) and Mikulksi (D-MD).

Eliminate the Cap Amendment

In the Senate Commerce Committee markup of comprehensive tobacco
legislation on April 1, Sen.
Byron Dorgan (D-ND) moved to strike the $6.5 billion a year cap proposed
in the bill. This cap lets
the industry off the hook for cheap. The u.S. Treasury Department
estimates that the economic
costs alone of tobacco related illness is $130 billion a year. A $6.5
annual cap limits the industry's
liability to 5 cents on the dollar of these tobacco-related costs.

Those voting FOR removing the cap were:

Ashcroft (R-MO), Brownback (R-KS), Dorgan (D-ND)   and Rockefeller (D-WV).

Those voting AGAINST removing the cap were:

Abraham (R-MI), Breaux (D-LA) , Bryan (D-NV) , Burns (R-MT), Ford (D-KY),
Frist (R-TN),
Gorton (R-WA), Hollings (D-SC), Hutchison (R-TX), Inouye (D-HI), Kerry
(D-MA) , McCain
(R-AZ), Snowe (R-ME), Stevens (R-AK), and Wyden (D-OR).

Comparing the Votes

Despite voting FOR the sense of the Senate resolution opposing immunity
the day before, 10
Commerce Committee members voted AGAINST the Dorgan amendment to lift the
caps. Several
of these Senators said they did not believe a $6.5 billion cap on the
industry's yearly liability was a
form of "immunity" (even though that amount is only 5% of the tobacco
industry's annual economic
damage in health costs and lost productivity.)

Committee members who voted FOR the no immunity resolution but AGAINST the
amendment to
lift the cap were:

Abraham (R-MI), Breaux (D-LA) , Bryan (D-NV) , Frist (R-TN), Hutchison
(R-TX), Inouye
(D-HI), Kerry (D-MA) , McCain (R-AZ), Snowe (R-ME), and Wyden (D-OR).


