RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

-CREATION DATE/TIME:31-JAN-1997 16:17:08.00

SUBJECT:   NGA Talkers on Benefits to Immigrants

TO: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN=Stephen C. Warnath/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lyn A. Hogan ( CN=Lyn A. Hogan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI, this is a comparison of us vs. NGA from Ken Apfel. They have written
it to emphasize common ground between us and the NGA, whereas the chart I
did was really intended to emphasize differences. Also, theirs is
intended to be public, whereas mine was for internal.

Elena, this could come in handy if you get snagged into something this
weekend.



---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 01/31/97
03:35 PM ---------------------------



        Kenneth S. Apfel
        01/31/97 01:06:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To:
cc: Diana Fortuna
Subject: NGA Talkers on Benefits to Immigrants

Message Creation Date was at 31-JAN-1997 13:06:00

We have developed some talking points comparing the NGA proposal relating
to
benefits to immigrants with the AdministrationD!,s proposal.  The NGA has
made
significant proposals in this area, though different from our proposal in
a
number of ways.  The talking points below could be incorporated into other
talking points being developed for anyone meeting with NGA or working on
their
proposal.

Talkers:


NGA DRAFT PROPOSAL ON BENEFITS TO LEGAL IMMIGRANTS

The NGA and the President share a common concern regarding the impact the


welfare billD!,s benefit ban will have on low income legal immigrants,
especially the disabled and refugees. The main difference between the
proposals
is that the President targets cash and medical assistance to current and
future
disabled legal immigrants while the NGA would provide cash, some medical
and
food assistance only to legal immigrants currently in the country.  In
addition, although they approach the problem differently, both proposals
address the special needs of refugees.

By banning legal immigrants from participating in the SSI, Medicaid, Food
Stamps and other major assistance programs, the welfare bill inherently
shifts
the cost of supporting disadvantaged legal immigrants to the States. The
NGA
and the PresidentD!,s proposals each would address this concern, albeit in
different ways.  Preliminary estimates indicates that the proposals have a
similar budgetary impact and would provide a significant restoration of
benefits.

The NGA would continue to provide SSI and Food Stamps to all elderly and
disabled immigrants currently in the country. However, no assistance
would be
available for future low income immigrants who suffer a disability or
develop
an unexpected illness.  The PresidentD!,s proposal provides greater long
term
support for disabled immigrants, including children, and ensures their
access
to health care. The proposal would continue SSI and Medicaid eligibility
for
disabled immigrants, including the disabled elderly, for all current and
future
immigrants.

Governors should be urged to voice their concerns with the Congress about
the
impact of the benefit ban on legal immigrants and refugees in the States.
Some
on the Hill are considering a block grant to provide assistance to those
States
with large immigrant populations losing benefits under the welfare law.
While
we are pleased that the Congress is starting to consider fixes in this
area,
States and immigrants would be better served by a reinstatement of federal
cash, food and medical assistance than they would by a small capped block
grant.


