RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 08:41:02.00

SUBJECT:     down on the farm

TO: Cynthia Dailard      CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Tough questions await Clinton

                    Tobacco farmers find little hope in current
                    policy

                    By Jefferson George
                    Central Kentucky Bureau

                    CARROLLTON - Secret Service agents are preparing this
small Ohio
                River town for President Clinton's visit Thursday, but
agents likely can't
                head off hard questions from people who say getting tough
with tobacco
                could ruin farmers.

                 Clinton has repeatedly cited a need to help farmers in
any national tobacco
                 legislation. But in an area where pickup trucks bear
bumper stickers
                 claiming "Tobacco Pays My Bills," the president's pledge
to fight teen
                 smoking and increase taxes on tobacco products has some
saying attacks
                 on manufacturers could hurt many small farmers.

                    "I'd ask him if he'd like to make my farm payment and my
truck payment,
                 since I'd lose both of them," said Billy Kidwell, a
Trimble County farmer
                 who took tobacco to Carrollton yesterday for sale today.

                    Kidwell and others have visions of a hard line on tobacco
leading buyers to
                 start dealing only with large farms for their tobacco
supply, leaving behind
                 family farms of fewer than 100 acres.

                    "It'll put a farmer like me out," said Stephen Carpenter,


who raises about
                 25 acres of tobacco in Pendleton County. "I voted for
him, and I'm sorry I
                 did. (Tobacco) is the only thing I can see that he's do
ing wrong."

                    Farmers said they hear talk of support for small farms,
but, with few
                    specific measures, their fears for the future mount.

                    "Are we going to have a program?" asked Melvin Lyons, who
raises about
                    60 acres of tobacco in Henry County and owns Carrollton's
Kentuckiana
                    Tobacco Warehouse, which Clinton will visit.    "Is tobacco
going to go on,
                    or will it be eliminated?"

                 In the mix of ideas in the proposed national settlement
are proposals to end
                 tobacco's price-support program and offer farmers a
buyout of their
                 tobacco allotments, an option that some aren't ready to
embrace.

                 "It's a bribe, that's all it is," said Don Taylor, a
Franklin County farmer and
                 part-owner of Carrollton's Brite Lite Tobacco Warehouse.

                 And land without tobacco just isn't as valuable, Kidwell
said, explaining that
                 he has raised grain and seen that it isn't as profitable
as the golden leaf.

                    "You just can't make any_ money," he said.   "The expense is
too much."

                    Kidwell said he's noticed tobacco farming becoming an
older man's
                    business; fewer young men enter the profession because
"the future's too
                    uncertain.   II




                 Others endorse that observation, saying negative
pUblicity on tobacco has
                 taken a toll.

                 "We're not getting -any kind of encouragement for the
younger guys, even if
                 they've been on the farm all their lives and that's what
their daddies did,"
                 said Brent Lyons, Melvin Lyons' son, who also works at
the family's
                 tobacco warehouse.

                    As he puffed on a cigarette yesterday, the younger Lyons
said he
                    understood Clinton's concern for teen smoking but didn't
understand how
                    manufacturers of tobacco products could be held
tf--    " ,..


       accountable. That's like
                         faulting breweries for underage drinking, he said, and in
       both cases, young
                         people will find a way to get what's forbidden.

                         Clinton will speak on teen smoking Thursday afternoon at
       Carroll County
                         High School. About 2,000 people are expected to attend,
       mostly students
                         from Carroll and nearby counties.

                         One of them will be Carroll County High junior Marissa
       Vaught, 17, who
                         was chosen to speak with Clinton at a forum earlier in
       the day.

                        After her initial surprise yesterday at being called to
       principal's office - "r
                        thought r was in trouble," she said - Marissa wants to
       hear why Clinton
                        chose Carrollton and her school to talk about tobacco.

                         "How does this affect us?" she asked.
-\!. .'.
  ,
