  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD 1

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 08:43:49.00

  SUBJECT:   we'll be lucky to get out alive

  TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Growers await visit by Clinton


                     Tuesday, April 7, 1998

                     BY PATRICK CROWLEY
                     The Cincinnati Enquirer

                    FORT MITCHELL -- People in the Ohio River town of
  Carrollton, Ky., are
                    excitedly preparing for President Clinton's visit
  Thursday,

                     "Everybody's talking about it," Carroll County
                     Judge-executive Gene MCMurry said Monday after a series
                     of meetings with the Secret Service, a White House
  advance
                     team and members of the president's communications
  office.

                     "How many people get to play host to a U.S. president?"

                     It will be Mr. Clinton's second visit to Carrollton, 60
  miles
                     southwest of Cincinnati. He visited there in 1992 after
  he
                     won the Democratic nomination for president.

                    Mr. Clinton is expected in Carrollton on Thursday to
  discuss the federal
                    tobacco settlement with growers, and how to reduce teen
  smoking with
                    students from Carroll County High School.

                     Mr. McMurry said plans are for Mr. Clinton to land at
  the Cincinnati -
                    Northern Kentucky International Airport on Thursday
  morning, and travel to
                    Carroll County High School.
j\. ARMS Email System
       .
 -,
                   Mr. Clinton will then meet with tobacco growers at the
 Kentuckiana Tobacco
                   Warehouse.

                        Warehouse owner Melvin Lyons said it will be "an honor"
 to have the
                        president visit his business.

                        "I'm not really sure I know everything about his tobacco
 policy," Mr. Lyons
                    said, "so I'll listen to what he has to say. But I sure
 don't want him to do away
                    with the (federal price support) program. That would be
 bad for us who work
                    in tobacco and for those who grow it." Under the
 program, the federal
                    government annually sets a per-pound price for tobacco,
 and then agrees to
                    buy the crop the tobacco companies do not.

                   Kentucky congressional candidates are taking sides in
 the tobacco debate.

                     Boone County Judge-executive Ken Lucas, a Democrat
  running for the 4th
                     District congressional seat, said he is scheduled to
 'attend a Boy Scout
                     luncheon in Ashland on Thursday and won't be able to
 make the president's
                     visit.

                        But Mr. Lucas said he talked to the president last month
 when Mr. Clinton
                        was in Cincinnati for a fund-raiser.

                   "Now he has finally come to listen .   . and the
 president gave me his word that
                   he would listen to our farmers, and I'm glad to see he's
 keeping his promise,"
                   Mr. Lucas said.

                   Mr. Lucas' opponent in the primary, Dr. Howard Feinberg
 of Greenup, said he
                   probably will attend Mr. Clinton's visit, though he
 differs on the tobacco
                   policy.

                        During the weekend, Mr. Clinton said a bill implementing
  the tobacco
                        settlement should be even tougher on the companies than
  the bill approved
                        by a Senate committee last week.

                   "I think what the president is trying to do will
 eliminate the current production
                   system of tobacco in Kentucky, and that will devastate
 the economies of small
                   towns and entire counties in Kentucky that depend on
 tobacco," Dr. Feinberg
.",
                     said.

                     U.S. Rep. Scotty Baesler of Lexington, a candidate in
 the U.S. Senate
                   Democratic primary, will probably travel to Kentucky
 with Mr. Clinton on Air
                   Force One, said Bob Wiseman of his Lexington campaign      0
 ffice.

                     Mr. Baesler, a tobacco grower, refused to appear with
 Mr. Clinton in
                   Lexington the day before the 1996 election. At the time,
 Mr. Baesler said he
                   opposed Mr. Clinton's call to regulate tobacco as a drug
 . "That was a different
                   situation because (Mr. Clinton) was in a campaign mode,"
 Mr. Wiseman said
                   Monday. "Right now, the president is coming to Kentucky
 to talk about an
                   issue that is important to Scotty and important to
 Kentucky. "

                     U.S. Rep. Jim Bunning of Southgate, a candidate for the
 GOP nomination in
                   the U.S. Senate race, said Mr. Clinton's trip is an
 example of his arrogance.

                     "Bill Clinton is trying to destroy tobacco," Mr. Bunning
 said. "He has no
                     business coming here to talk about it."

                   Fort Mitchell attorney Rick Robinson, a Republican
 running in the 4th District
                   congressional primary, said Mr. Clinton needs to have a
 "real eye-to-eye
                   exchange with people whose livelihood is at stake."

                     " "I feel your pain' isn't. going to cut it," he said.

                   Republican Jim Kidney of Fort Thomas, a 4th District
 candidate, said Mr.
                   Clinton doesn't care about policy as much as politics.
 "He's looking to do
                   what suits him best in the polls," Mr. Kidney said.


