RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 22:50:18.00

SUBJECT:   needles

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the gist of what we should say in this options memo:

We have consulted quietly with outside experts and advocates on both sides
of this issue.  Elite and editorial opinion generally runs strongly in
favor of needle exchange. A number of respected scientists and public
health experts, including Harold Varmus and the AMA, believe the
scientific evidence is solid, as far as it goes.   (It is impossible to
prove whether needle exchange programs actually reduce drug use, because
it would be unethical to run a controlled experiment that compares addicts
who have access to clean needles with addicts who don't.)   Dr. Koop has a
more nuanced view. As Surgeon General, he visited a number of programs in
Europe, and concluded that 1) needle programs were a failure in
communities where they ran against the grain of the local society, but
there was no evidence that they attracted non-addicts to start a drug
habit; and 2) he doubts needle programs will be very effective here,
because most addicts are so far outside the mainstream that they will not
show up reliably, especially if they're not in drug treatment.

The AIDS community and the anti-drug community are miles apart.   At a
minimum, AIDS groups want us to provide some legitimacy to needle
programs. We might be able to muster half-hearted support from HRC for
the compromise options below, but most groups will be disappointed if we
don't go along with Shalala's recommendations.   (Of course, even if we do
go along, we will be back to square one with the groups a few months from
now unless we veto any attempt by Congress to overturn this action.)
Conversely, anti-drug advocates like Califano and Burke will oppose needle
exchange with the same fervor they express for drug legalization.

The options are:

1) Let Shalala certify.   In taking this action, she could either put
forward an interim final regulation, which would allow federal funds to
flow to a community as soon as that community met the conditions in the
HHS regulation [EK -- you can describe these if you want, but there's no
need to], or she could issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, which would
require a public comment period and would not take effect for 6 months or
so -- long enough for Congress to overturn it and/or the elections to take
place.   [You had asked whether HHS could actually require individuals in
needle programs to participate in drug treatment.   They say that would be
counterproductive, because it would discourage the most at-risk addicts
from taking part.]

2) Let federal scientists declare that needle exchange programs reduce HIV
without increasing drug use, but limit federal funds to a few
demonstration cities, and ask Shalala and McCaffrey to study whether those
programs work.   This approach will be harder to attack, because it does
not constitute an endorsement of needle programs -- but it may end up
pleasing no one.



3) Let federal scientists declare that needle exchange programs reduce HIV
without increasing drug use, but withhold federal funds on the grounds
that no national consens'us exists" and ask Shalala and McCaffrey either to
build that consensus, or to study whether the competing goals of reducing
HIV and discouraging illegal drug use can be reconciled. This approach
will also be somewhat more difficult to attack, because with no federal
funds going to needle programs, Congress can't do much to stop it.   Howev
er, many in the AIDS community will regard this position as morally
bankrupt, arguing. that we know these programs can slow the AIDS epidemic
but we don't have the courage to do anything about it.

EK -- You can elaborate on these if you want to.  I don't actually know
Califano and Burke's position -- maybe Rahm could confirm for you.  Also,
it would be worth knowing Kevin's view, Richard's view, Ron's view, Chris
or HRC's view, and dare-I-say-it, even MCCaffrey's view (although that's
obviously the least important) on the various options.  I feel a little
guilty that we're not consulting Sandy, but I don't know what to do about
it.

FYI -- Kevin told me he thinks the amount of money at stake is $30-90
million. I tried to get him to answer another question, whether there
were waiting lines for needle programs. He didn't know.


