RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Dennis K. Burke ( CN=Dennis K. Burke/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-JAN-1997 18:13:25.00

SUBJECT:   More SOTU comments for Bruce

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/o=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I talked to Kent Markus at Justice and here are his comments:

        1.      He wanted to know if we mention "civil rights" anywhere
in the speech.  The AG thinks it is an area that at the minimum just needs
to be mentioned so that no one can accuse us of not mentioning it.

        2.      He wanted to know where we got the 100,000 criminal
aliens goal    I assumed Steve was looking into that and has been working
wi INS. He did note as an aside that saying "We should" is not as strong
as just "Our goal is ... "

        3.      He recommends that we mentioned youth alcohol abuse
somewhere -- it could fit at the end of "My balanced budget includes the
largest anti-drug effort ever: to stop drugs at their source, punish those
who push them, and steer young people away from drugs and alcohol."

        4.      On the Youth Violence Bill paragraph, here are some
points I talked through with him:

        Change Brady/juvenile sentence to:  "Extends the Brady law check
to prevent violent juveniles from ever buying a handgun."   The current
sentence says "extends the Brady Bill so a minor .... " But technically
Brady does not disqualify an individual from buying a handgun -- the 1968
Gun Act does that; Brady is a check of that disqualification.   Not an
earth-crushing distinction, but the rewrite is not bad rhetorically and
more correct.

        Change Safety lock sentence:    "requires gun safety locks to help prevent
theft and tragic accidents."   This takes out "trigger" which is awkward
(and actually incorrect because the lock is not on the trigger) .   "Help"
gives us some wiggle room in case someone claims these locks will have no
impact.   "Theft and tragic accidents" sounds better than "unauthorized
use. "

        Provide resources sentence:     wants us to ad in this sentence
"provides resources to communities so they can deal with truancy, school
violence, and can keep schools .... "  AG wanted us to emphasize that the
resouces are going to the "community" and we have a grant program in the
bill -- separate from the Afterschool program -- for anti-truancy, school
violence programs, curfews, etc.


