RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:I0-APR-1998 08:46:58.00

SUBJECT:   NPR story reo welfare reform/business involvement

TO: Anil Kakani ( CN=Anil Kakani/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP    @   EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cheryl M. Carter ( CN=Cheryl M. Carter/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here' the NPR story/Governor Carper    interview on the Partnership's
Wirthlin study of businesses.   It's   nice that they combined it with the VP
event yesterday.    It's also a good   "one year after" on launching the
Partnership.  I've done a weekly on    the study.

Former Welfare Recipients Make Good Workers, Study Shows
Reported by David Molpus, Chapel Hill; Noah Adams, Washington, DC

ROBERT SIEGEL, HOST: This is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.       I'm Robert Siegel.

NOAH ADAMS, HOST: And I'm Noah Adams.

Today, Vice President Al Gore again urged employers to give jobs to welfare
recipients.  He appealed especially to companies that have contracts with
the
federal government. There's new evidence that putting welfare recipients
to
work makes sense for business.

As NPR's David Molpus reports, a national survey released today shows that
most
companies already hiring from the welfare rolls say they plan to do more
this
year.

DAVID MOL PUS , NPR REPORTER: Last year, amidst great fanfare, the Clinton
administration claimed that welfare reform was about to kick into high
gear,
riding on the shoulders of American business.


Leaders of some of the nation's biggest corporations were brought to
Washington
for high-profile photo ops and broad pledges to move people from public
assistance to private sector employment. Many Washington insiders doubted
employers would actually follow through. Cynics saw it as a PR move.

But, a just-completed survey of those businesses making the welfare pledge
indicates there is some real substance behind the rhetoric.

GOVERNOR THOMAS R. CARPER (D-DE): A lot of employers have actually hired
somebody off of a welfare roll. And for the most part, they're well
pleased
with the work that's being done by that new hire.

MOLPUS: That's Thomas Carper, the Democratic governor of Delaware. And
one of
the leaders of what's called The Welfare to Work Partnership. This
collaborative effort of business and government started with only a
handful of
employers, but now includes more than 3,000. And the overwhelming
majority have
kept their pledge. Again, Governor Carper.

CARPER: Roughly three out of four believe that the new hires have proven
to be
good, productive employees. And about 80 percent of those surveyed expect
to
hire somebody off of a welfare roll during the course of this year.  So,
we find
that all very encouraging.

MOLPUS: Actual numbers of those hired remain sketchy. But by one
estimate, all
private business has hired about 300,000 off the welfare rolls over the
past
year and a half. That's compared to an overall adult welfare population
of 6.5
million.

One company that's been especially successful is Burger King. The
corporation
and its franchise holders have made at least 15,000 welfare hires so far,
and
that number's expected to double by the end of this year, according to
human
resources chief Anthony Austin (ph).

One of the surprising benefits, Austin says, is that the turnover rate
among
these workers from welfare is far lower than the usual.

ANTHONY AUSTIN, HUMAN RESOURCES CHIEF, BURGER KING CORPORATION: It looks
like
it's about half of what the turnover is in our current work force.

MOLPUS: United Airlines, Sprint, and several other companies cite similar
results. Anthony Austin says this employee pool is a good fit for Burger
King,
"we need the workers and they need jobs. Besides," he says, "most are in
the


same age group as our customers, and the company is geared towards people
seeking entry-level employment."

  AUSTIN: We have the kinds of roles and the kinds of opportunities that can
  start
. an individual at an entry-level job wit'h no business knowledge and provide
  that
  business experience for them. They get the responsibility of work, of
  coming on
  time. Making sure that they have the proper appearance.

And then, they get things like customer service training, product
preparation,
things that are absolutely essential to them being successful in this
particular
job that allows them not only to move up our system, but into other
employment
situations as well.

MOLPUS: Among the main obstacles preventing hiring more former welfare
recipients, according to the new survey, are lack of child care and
transportation. Only 17 percent of the employers surveyed offer any
assistance
for child care, even fewer help employees meet transportation needs.

 Some states, however, are taking new steps in those areas. Governor Carper
 says expanding public transportation in Delaware is, at least indirectly,
 helping those transitioning from welfare to work.

 CARPER: We've increased the transit service in northern Delaware by about
 40
 percent. And we've actually introduced, for the first time, public
 transit in
 our central and southern counties. We've distributed, in our state,
 thousands
 of vouchers that the people can use for transportation services, and about
 150
 employers are involved in that as well.

 MOLPUS: Despite the success stories and signs of progress, the business
 executives surveyed say a high proportion of these new workers still don't
 last
 in the job.  The executives place part of the blame on poor support
 systems,
 such as personal mentoring and transportation, but also on poor job
 skills, a
 poor work ethic, and lack of motivation.

 Those realities combine to keep most employers outside the welfare
 partnership
 from hiring off the welfare rolls, if possible.

 DEAN DEBNAM (PH), PRESIDENT, WORK PLACE OPTIONS (PH): They don't view this
 pool
 of workers as a greatly desirable pool of workers.

 MOLPUS: That's Dean Debnam, president of Work Place Options, a business
 consulting firm based in Raleigh, North Carolina.

 DEBNAM: You're not on welfare for no reason.   There's drug problems --
(.~   ..                                                                            Page 4 of4


      they live
      on the edge so much that too many things can go wrong.  Whether it's their
      health or their child's health or their day care arrangement or something
      else,
      life is very fragile for them.

      And because their life is fragile, and because there isn't great support
      mechanisms out there, it makes them not as dependable as they could be.

      MOLPUS: Dean Debnam says business can do more, but government has to do a
      lot
      more, especially on the child care front.  Debnam says in parts of North
      Carolina, for example, even areas that are relatively well off, like Chapel
      Hill, there are large pockets of the poor who are a long way from standing
      on
      their own.

      DEBNAM: Even those that are coming to work, they're still bringing
      hopelessness
      with them, or the working poor don't expect to succeed.  And some of it,
      you
      can't blame them.  When you take a county -- again, you know, I'm very
      familiar
      with Orange County, where we have 1.5 percent unemployment, but 19 percent
      of
      the population lives below the poverty level.

      That means that you've got nearly 20 percent of your work force working 40
      hours
      a week and they still cannot rise above the poverty level. And that's
      after all
      the subsidies that we have.

      MOLPUS: Businesses that are hiring from the welfare rolls remain
      optimistic,
      according to the new national survey. And they predict these efforts will
      continue to grow, driven mainly by the tight labor market.

      The survey indicates that most companies are not even bothering to claim
      the tax
      credits they are entitled to, because of the red tape involved.  It's the
      need
      for workers, almost any workers, that's keeping welfare reform on its
      bumpy track towards success.

      I'm David Molpus, NPR News, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.


