RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-APR-1998 15:09:34.00

SUBJECT:   Regionals

TO: Mary L. Smith      CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: . Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
There was a lot of great regional coverage on the front pages.        e.g.,
Clinton: 'We can do it'

                    President assures farmers of concern about
                    their future

                    By Gail Gibson
                    Herald-Leader Washington Bureau

                    CARROLLTON - President Clinton yesterday brought the
nation's
                    turbulent tobacco talks to the heart of burley country,
where he promised
                 Kentucky growers protection amid national efforts to
crackdown on youth
                 smoking.

                    Talking to growers, farm leaders and high
                    school students in a half-day visit to Northern
                    Kentucky, Clinton pressed his case for a
                    national tobacco policy, saying it would offer
                    farmers and tobacco-dependent rural
                    communities a more certain future.

                 "If you want to do this, and do it right, we can
                 do it," Clinton told a.packed audience in the Carroll
County High School
                 gym. "We don't have to wreck the fabric of life in your
community. We
                 don't have to rob honest people of their way of life."

                 In particular, the president talked about the importance
of the crop's federal
                 price-support program and pointed to a plan by U.S. Sen.
Wendell Ford
                 as a good way to protect growers' livelihood.

                   Clinton's visit came at a critical juncture in the nearly
year-old tobacco


                 settlement talks.

                  On Wednesday, the nation's leading cigarette
manufacturers abandoned
                  congressional efforts to draft a comprehensive tobacco
settlement. That
                  move came after months of work to reach an agreement that
would give the
                  industry some protections from smokers' health-related
lawsuits in return
                  for billion-dollar payments to states and agreements to
curb advertising.

                 Industry leaders said Congress was demanding too much
from the
                  companies. They vowed to fight any efforts to raise
cigarette taxes or
                  restrict tobacco advertising, and they said that Congress
had lost a unique
                  opportunity by playing politics with the issue.

                 But Clinton, who had scheduled his trip to Kentucky
before the companies'
                 pullout, said yesterday that it still is in the best
interest of the country for
                 lawmakers to enact stricter controls over tobacco. He
called on the
                 companies to keep working with Congress.

                 "Even in tobacco country, we can't deny what the
scientists have told us, or
                 what has been done to market tobacco to children in ways
that
                 compromise their future," Clinton said. "To me, no
company's bottom line is
                 important compared to America's bottom line."

                 In Kentucky, Clinton was greeted by cheering,
camera-toting students as
                 well as protesters from a cigarette company and many
growers who are
                 wary of the most anti-tobacco president in history.

                 Signs on Carrollton businesses reflected the mixed views
of residents
                 receiving a president in this town with a long tobacco
tradition. "Protect our
                 Farms," was the message at one gas station. Across the s
treet, another
                 advertised, "Save Here on Cigarettes."

                 Some 400 workers from Louisville-based Brown & Williamson
Tobacco
                    Co. stood along the president's motorcade route wearing
T-shirts that
                 declared, "It's my job," and waving signs with slogans
such as "Stop taxing
                 tobacco," and "I'm a tobacco employee."

                    "We're trying to represent the 45 million adults who


enjoy cigarettes and
                 should be allowed to," said Nicholas Brookes, B&W's chief
executive
                 officer.

                    "The employees are not here because I told them to be
here," Brookes
                    added.   "They are here because they want to be here."

                 At the Kentuckiana Tobacco Warehouse in Carrollton,
Clinton met with a
                 small group that included tobacco growers, farm leaders,
a health advocate,
                 a student and a ~aptist minister. Later, he addressed stud
ents and local and
                 state officials at the high school.

                    One grower, Meade County farmer Mattie Mack, spoke as if
at a church
                 revival. She told Clinton how tobacco had sent three of
her four children to
                 college and helped her and her husband to raise 38 foster
children - none of
                 whom smoked. In tobacco, there is good with the bad, she
told the
                 president.

                    "We're against children smoking, Mr. President, but we
shouldn't be
                    penalized on account of children smoking," said Mack, 61,
who grows
                    7,000 pounds of tobacco on her lOa-acre farm.

                    Clinton acknowledged that if his efforts to reduce youth
smoking are
                    successful, demand for Kentucky's leading cash crop will
drop.

                 But he said enacting broad tobacco legislation would
offer farmers what
                 they don't have now - some certainty about the future of
their crop.

                    And he promised that any tobacco legislation will include
economic help for
                    growers, such as Ford's Long-Term Economic Assistance for
Farmers
                    plan, also known as the LEAF Act. Ford's proposal would
compensate
                    farmers for lost income, offer price guarantees for those
who want to keep
                    growing and provide other benefits to rural communities
long dependent on
                    tobacco.

                    Ford, who traveled with Clinton in Kentucky along with
Gov. Paul Patton
                    and other state leaders, welcomed the president's
support.


                 "I think he understands," said Ford, an Owensboro
Democrat and one of
                 the growers' fiercest allies in Washington.

                    The president showed no softening in his approach to the
cigarette makers,
                    even as some of the farm leaders he met with cautioned
against being too
                    harsh on an industry that provides thousands of jobs acro
ss the South.

                 "It's very easy to talk about punishing the tobacco
companies for their evil
                 doings, but we want to show you this gets back to the
people," Bill
                 Sprague, president of the Kentucky Farm Bureau
Federation, told Clinton.

                    Clinton defended efforts to toughen last year's proposed
$368.5 billion
                    settlement. The most recent proposal would put the price
tag at $516
                    billion.

                    And he repeated his call for the manufacturers to keep
working with
                    lawmakers.

                 "I hope they will reconsider ... But we're going to do
this this year if I can
                 control the outcome," Clinton said.

                    But an industry spokesman yesterday said the companies
see little chance
                    for any productive settlement talks now.

                 "The industry's feelings today are as they were
yesterday," said Steve
                 Duchesne, a spokesman for the companies involved in last
year's
                 settlement. "And that is that the current political
environment in Washington
                 has become so poisoned that we don't see that any
rational negotiations can
                 take place."

                                                *
page one.


