RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-APR-1998 11:46:05.00

SUBJECT:   GOP/Disability Groups on IDEA

TO: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP'@ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI.
---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 04/20/98
11:46 AM ---------------------------




William H. White Jr.
04/20/98 11:36:33 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP, Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP, Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP,
Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP
cc:
Subject:         GOP/Disability Groups on IDEA

FYI
---------------------- Forwarded by William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP on
04/20/98 11:37 AM ---------------------------



Jake Siewert
04/20/98 11:24:55 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP
cc:
Subject:         FYI

Clinton's agenda shortchanges disabled, critics say

    WASHINGTON (AP)   President Clinton's proposal to use federal
money to hire teachers and build schools is drawing criticism from
Republicans and advocates for disabled children who say he should
first ensure that states have the money to educate youngsters with
special needs.
    The GOP hopes its argument will switch the focus of the
education debate, highlighting local control and parental choice.
    Clinton's proposals, aimed at reducing class size, have broad
appeal, Republicans know. But they hope their focus on the federal
government's'treatment of about 6 million children with
disabilities also will draw strong support.
    The federal government this year gave states about $3.8 billion
to help local schools educate disabled children. That is well below


  the target amount set out in legislation a quarter-century ago.
       Meanwhile, special education services such as transportation,
  classroom aides, equipment and even private school tuition for
  children with special needs are a major and fast-growing expense.
       The nonpartisan Economic Policy Institute says nearly $2 out of
  every $10 spent on education in 1996 went to special needs.
       If states received the money they were promised under the
  Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, local schools would
  not need new federal money for classrooms and teachers, Republicans
  say.
       Clinton has proposed $12 billion for new classrooms and teachers
  over five years.
       --If they put those two in special education, they would have
  fully funded it,"    said Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., who has been
  leading efforts to increase the federal contribution.
       But administration officials say well-trained teachers in
  smaller classes will spot children with learning disabilities early
  on. They also say these teachers could prevent other children with
  difficulties from being misdiagnosed with disabilities. Eighty
  percent of special education children spend more than 40 percent of
  their time in regular classrooms, the Education Department notes.
       For the past two years, Congress has given more to special
  education than the administration proposed, bringing the federal
  share of overall costs up to 10 percent. The law authorizes federal
  spending of up to 40 percent.
       A budget blueprint passed this month by the Senate would
  increase spending for special education by $2.5 billion over five
  years, far from enough to meet the 40 percent goal.
       Governors, parents of disabled children, school boards and state
  officials have all called for more federal support. Some Democrats
  agree, but they dispute the idea that a tradeoff with other
  education programs is necessary.
       --We've found money for highway funds, " said Sen. Chris Dodd,
  D-Conn., referring to a $217 billion transportation spending bill
  making its way through Congress. --We can find it for"      special
  education.
       The Education Department says 40 percent federal support is a
  cap, not an obligation, and the --free appropriate" education
  required under the 1975 law is a civil right, not an unfunded
  mandate as the GOP argues.
       - -people don't say that general education is· an unfund·ed mandate
  and unless we get so much money from the federal government we're
  going to stop serving non-disabled kids in our school, " said the
  department's Judith Heumann.
       Paying for 40 percent of special education would cost the
  federal government $14.7 billion in 1999, the department estimates,
  consuming nearly half its discretionary budget.
       Not everyone with Republican ties agrees with the GOP strategy.
  Chester E. Finn Jr., a top Education Department official during the
  Reagan administration, said the party is overcompensating after
  previous efforts to cut education programs backfired with voters.
       --Now they're pumping money into programs that should not have
  more money, " Finn said. Special education costs keep rising, he
  believes, because school systems use the program as a way to get
  money.
       Special education requirements are becoming increasingly tough
  on states, especially as courts reaffirm their responsibility to
. support local schools.
       Ohio voters must decide this spring whether to raise the state
  sales tax by a penny, in part to meet special education costs.


Michigan last year settled a lawsuit over special education by
agreeing to pay $1 billion to school districts.
    Obligatory spending often breeds resentment against families
with special-needs children, said Michael Hill, .who heads an
educational services group in northern New Hampshire. If voters
reject the money, families with disabled children can sue. "Towns
begin to kind of rip apart, " Hill said.
APNP-04-20-98 0844EDT


