RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1998 10:06:54.00

SUBJECT:   tobacco WHOPPER

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Tuesday April 21 6:41 AM EDT

Gingrich: Teen Smoking Not Caused by Joe Camel

By Alan Elsner, Political Correspondent

CONSHOHOCKEN, Pa. (Reuters) - House Speaker Newt Gingrich attacked
proposed bipartisan
anti-smoking legislation, saying teen smoking had no connection with the
well-known Joe Camel
advertising campaign.

At a campaign fund-raising dinner for Pennsylvania Republican Rep. John
Fox, Gingrich said: "In
order to understand what's happened with teen smoking, this is not
complicated. It has nothing to do
with Joe Camel."

Gingrich said Monday that a much greater cause of teen smoking was the
example of Hollywood
stars smoking on screen and he cited the example of "Titanic" and its male
lead Leonardo DiCaprio.

"(President) Clinton could go to Hollywood, have dinner with his friends
and get them all to sign up a
'no smoking on screen' pledge and he would overnight do more to stop teen
smoking than 400
government programs."

Earlier in an interview with Reuters, Gingrich attacked Clinton for
setting a bad example by
occasionally smoking cigars to celebrate good news.

"Let's be clear here about who gives the right signals. I don't smoke
cigars when I'm celebrating. I
don't send the signal that smoking is okay when you're winning," he said.

Gingrich said he was prepared to kill a proposed anti-smoking package
moving through the Senate,
crafted by fellow Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona, which includes a
steep hike in cigarette
taxes.

Gingrich said the plan was a "classically liberal bill" that raised taxes
and created new government
   . <.
bureaucracy.

Clinton earlier called the McCain bill "a strong step in the right
direction" urged Congress to resist
tobacco industry pressure to derail the anti-smoking legislation.

Tobacco companies have attacked the McCain bill, saying it could drive
them into bankruptcy.

Gingrich said he was "prepared to draw the line all summer on no new
bureaucracy and no net tax
increase because that undermines everything we were elected to do."

Gingrich's spokeswoman Christina Martin said Congress would pass "landmark
legislation" this year
to fight teen smoking and drug abuse. She said the tax cuts could be used
for such things as tax relief
related to health insurance for self-employed people or small businesses.
AREUTERS@


