RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-APR-1998 11:39:59.00

SUBJECT:   Title IX

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
In case we wind up playing phone tag, here's the basic story as I
understand it now:

1. ED/OCR will be sending a letter to Bowling Green U., articulating a
compliance standard for "substantial proportionality" in the awarding of
athletic scholarships to male and female athletes. OCR's standard is that
it won't seek remedial ation in cases where the $ discrepancy (unexplained
by appropriate factors) is less than 1 full scholarship.

2. OCR contends (1) that this is really no change from it past practices;
(2) this might be criticized by women's groups as too soft and
inconsistent with past practices, because it is less stringent than an
"exact proportionality".

3. However, Eddie Correia and I, after review ED's material, believe they
are actually tightening the enforcement standard.  In the past, ED would
accept as much as a 3% variation from exact proportionality, depending
upon the circumstances. Eddie thinks ED is right on the law on this m
ove, but has little doubt that this is a tightening of the standard.

4.  ED is planning on applying this standard to the current school year.
ED claims it notified the 25 schools of this standard verbally in
November.   It will ask schools found out of compliance for this current
school year to award additional scholarships, retrospectively, for this
school year. ED has not completed its investigations, so we do not know
how many or which particular schools would be affected.

5.  Eddie is trying to reach the appropriate people at Justice to get
their view of the situation. We don't have their input yet.

6. At a minimum, I suspect that if ED/OCR releases these letters tomorrow
as planned, the Administration will be criticized in some quarters,
including in part but clearly not limited to the higher ed community, for
its heavy handed appr~ach, at least for applying the standard to this year
rather than next.

This will also no doubt fuel additonal critiques, like the one in
yesterday Wall Street Journal, from Jessica Gavora (a Lamar Alexander
aide) about pending Title IX regulations from the Justice Department.
Gavora argues that the proposed regs would now require equal participation
in academic programs as well as athletic programs, thereby screwing up
academic programs as well as scientific and medical research programs.

I haven't yet had a chance to get on top of the Justice regs. According
to Eddie, they are a separate issue--though clearly easily linked in the
press.

7.   Other constituencies will presumably be pleased with OCR's action, and


concerned about any effort to weaken it.

That's why we need to talk.


