RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Barry Toiv ( TOIV_B )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-APR-1998 14:09:36.96

SUBJECT: GOP LEADERS DEAL PERHAPS MORTAL BLOW TO MCCAIN TOBACCO BILL

TO: Michelle Crisci                        ( Michelle Crisci@eop@LNGTWY@EOPMRX
READ:NOT READ

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ:NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E } Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Laura Emmett                              EMMETT L } Autoforward to: Remote Address
READ: NOT READ

TO: Cathy R. Mays                             MAYS C   (OPD)
READ:22-APR-1998 17:01:19.06

TO: Cynthia A. Rice                           RICE C ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

 TEXT:
Date: 04/22/98 Time: 11:39
 TGOP leaders deal perhaps mortal blow to McCain tobacco bill
     WASHINGTON (AP)   Senate GOP leaders are throwing their support
behind a narrowly focused bill aimed at reducing teen smoking and
 drug use, dimming prospects for a comprehensive national tobacco
policy being offered by Sen. John McCain.
     McCain's proposed $516 billion package of taxes and tighter
 controls on tobacco has created major rifts among his Republican
 colleagues, and Assistant Majority Leader Don Nickles of Oklahoma
 said Tuesday he preferred putting teen smoking and anti-drug
 legislation together in order to get something passed this election
year.
     "I'm going to try to link it,"     Nickles said. '-You don't have
 to have hundreds of billions of dollars switch hands to try to
 combat youth tobacco and drug use. ' ,
     Asked by reporters whether he agreed, Senate Majority Leader
 Trent Lott, R-Miss., nodded.
     " I put a lot of credence in the direction that Senator Nickles
points,"   he said. "We don't have to have a great big monstrous
 bill to do that."
     Their comments came two weeks after the tobacco industry
 fiercely rejected McCain's bill, which would have significantly
,toughened the $368 billion settlement the industry reached in June
 with 40 states suing it. McCain has acknowledged that without the
 industry's participation, the bill was meaningless.
     The White House reacted skeptically to Nickles' idea. "We
 already have a comprehensive drug strategy on the Hill, " press
 secretary Mike McCurry said today. "We wish they would pass it."
     GOP leaders refused to declare McCain's bill dead. But neither
 would they voice optimism for its chances, even though it passed
 the Senate Commerce Committee on a bipartisan 19-1 vote. Lott has
 said vast areas of dispute between and among members of both
 parties must be bridged and the bill passed by Memorial Day if it
".
      has any chance this year.
           McCain nonetheless arrived at the White House to push his bill
      during a meeting with President Clinton's chief of staff, Erskine
      Bowles. "He wants to see if they're really serious"     about signing
      on to a proposal for a sweeping national tobacco policy, Lott said.
      McCain reported "progress"    when he emerged.
      .    "If it doesn't work out, it doesn't. But I know I have given it
      my best shot,"   McCain said earlier in the day.
           McCain has said he was frustrated because Clinton has urged that
      the bill be made tougher but hasn't said how that could be done.
           participants at a morning meeting of senior congressional
      Republicans reported that several leaders said they liked the idea
       forwarded by House Speaker Newt Gingrich to focus on teen drug and
       tobacco use, rather than tackle McCain's broader bill.
           That measure has drawn bitter criticism from some Republicans on
       several fronts, chiefly because it would raise taxes on cigarettes
      by $1.10 a pack by 2003 and give the Food and Drug Administration
      new regulatory power over tobacco.
           But McCain and other proponents of a broad national tobacco
     .policy said a bipartisan bill was the only way to accomplish that
      goal and change the behavior of tobacco companies.
           Gingrich, R-Ga., has said tax increases and regulatory powers
      any tougher than those proposed in McCain's bill would be too
       liberal to have much chance of House passage. Clinton said Monday
      he hoped Gingrich would change his mind and support the
       legislation.
           The debate left the GOP torn over disputes on virtually every
       issue.
           "There are a lot of egos involved in this thing, " said Senate
      Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, whose own bill
      was shelved in favor of McCain's. "Right now, it's bad."
           Already, Clinton and congressional Democrats have accused
      Gingrich of retreating from their tough talk of tobacco policy.
      They say it's no coincidence that Gingrich denounced the McCain
      measure only days after the tobacco industry, which has poured
      millions of dollars into GOP campaign coffers, walked away from it.
           "They have been provided with tremendous financial support by
      the tobacco companies, and I don't blame them, if they want to
      protect them, that is what they have historically done, " Senate
      Minority Leader Tom Daschle said on Monday.
           But Republican leaders say they have given the tobacco industry
       the cold shoulder since documents surfaced that they believe
      indicate companies lied for years about hooking kids on smoking.
           "The documents that they finally released strip them of any
      pretense of any claim of respectability," Gingrich said Tuesday of
      the tobacco companies. "They clearly were trying to addict
      14-year-olds, and they were clearly lying to the United States
      Congress and the American people about their behavior."
           Gingrich added that he would agree to raise cigarette prices on
      two conditions: that they stay below the threshold that would spur
      a black market on tobacco and that any money raised be offset by
      tax cuts on such things as health care costs.
      APNP-04-22-98 1139EDT


