RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-APR-1998 20:27:07.00

SUBJECT:   Education weekly

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
D.C. Vouchers.  Mr. Armey announced earlier this week his plan to bring a
D.C. voucher bill to the House floor next week.  DPC, Legislative Affairs
and the Education Department are working with Ms. Norton and Mr.
GephardtD,s staff to fashion a messag~ and legislative strategy that
builds on the ideas in your Education Opportunity Zones proposal (e.g.,
ending social promotions and fixing failing schools) and your budget
proposals for D.C. already worked out with the D.C. schools (e.g., funding
for summer school to support the DistrictD,s new effort to end social
promotions, for efforts to implement proven practices in low performing
schools, and to provide reading specialists and teacher training in
reading. Elena--we have a meeting at 4:30 Friday with Norton/Gephardt
staff to finalize our plan; thatD,s why this is a bit short on detail now.

Ending Social Promotions: NYC Chancellor Rudy Crew unveiled a proposal
this week to end social promotions, by requiring students to pass tests in
the 4th and 7th grade in order to be promoted.   The proposal has received
favorable reactionsfrom a number of quarters, including the press--which
has routinely noted your call to end social promotions.   The proposal has
also focused public attention on the need to strengthen teaching in all
grades, to provide extra help early on to students who need it, and to
provide students in danger of failing with summer school.

 D.C. Charter Schools. 19 applicants for charter schools have received
preliminary approval to begin operations in the District of Columbia,
bringing the total of charter schools in DC to 23. Nine of these schools
were approved by the DC Board of Education -- the elected board that was
stripped of all powers except to charter schools.  Ten schools were
approved by the Independent Public Charter School Board -- a board
appointed by Mayor Barry from a pool of names given by Secretary Riley.
Among the new schools: a residential charter school for at-risk middle
school students, an adult education center for immigrants, and a
"hospitality" high school organized by the area hotel industry.

California charter schools. Negotiations are underway between Silicon
Valley high-tech executives and the California Teachers' Association (CTA)
over a possible legislative alternative to a charter school ballot
initiative backed by the executives and opposed by the CTA. The Silicon
Valley executives have been prepared to submit and campaign for a ballot
initiative making it easier to start charter schools in California, and
the CTA -- while expressing support for the concept of charter schools --
has indicated they would strongly oppose the initiative. The CTA has been
concerned about specific provisions in the initiative that would eliminate
the cap on how many charter schools can be created, as well as the impact
of the ballot on teacher certification and due process in charter schools.
 I.




The negotiatiations are aimed at reaching a legislative compromise as a
substitute for the ballot initiative. A bill needs to pass the California
legislature by May 1 in order for the high-tech executives to drop the
ballot initiative, and it appears possible (though not probable) that an
agreement will be reached in time.  We will provide you a status report
before your trip to California next week.


National Board for Professional Teaching Standards: Earlier this week a
bipartisan group of eight governors (Hunt, Locke, Chiles, Carper,
Voinovich, Racicot, Branstad and Thompson) wrote to Bill Goodling and to
the other chairs and ranking members of the appropriate authorizing and
appropriations committee chairs, expressing their support for the National
Board and for your funding request for the BoardO,s work.


