RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL         (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-APR-1998 19:33:48.00

SUBJECT:   Revised weekly -- changes in italics and in bold

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Sorry ... some changes ... j c3

Crime -- Chicago Gang Ordinance -- On Monday, the Supreme Court agreed to
hear the City of Chicago's defense of an anti-loitering statute that it
passed in 1992, and which the Illinois Supreme Court had ruled was
impermissibly vague and violating due process (Chicago v. Morales).   The
ordinance authorizes police officers to order individuals loitering in
public places to disperse if the officer "reasonably believes" any of the
individuals belongs to a street gang.  Individuals who refuse to abide by
the officers order could be arrested and, if convicted, sentenced up to 6
months in prisons, a $500 fine or 120 hours of community service. The
Chicago ordinance was challenged by the Illinois chapter of the ACLU.
Amicus briefs were filed by : (1)  a coalition of community organizations
in Chi~ago; (2) the major national associations representing local
government officials including, the u.S. Conference of Mayors, National
League of Cities, National Association of Counties, and International
Association of Chiefs of Police; and (3) 13 of the states.

The Chicago ordinance is similar to other efforts that cities and law
enforcement have used to crack down on gangs (e.g., Los Angeles' use of
civil injunctions to disrupt gang presence on city streets), and in which
we have taken an interest.  We are schedule to meet with Rahm and Chuck
Ruff next week to discuss this issue further.

Drugs -- Republican Task Force on Drugs -- On Thursday, April 30th,
Speaker Gingrich, Representatives Hastert and Portman, and other House
Republicans will unveil a "Drug-Free America Strategy" to win the War on
Drugs by the year 2002, and launch an 8-week campaign to pass a series of
anti-drug bills and resolutions.  In addition to criticizing the
Administration's leadership on drugs -- and highlighting controversial
issues like needle exchange and medical marijuana -- the strategy will
focus on following 3 themes:

Deterring Demand -- Prevention starts at home.   We must eliminate the
demand for illegal drugs through effective education and prevention
programs that keep kids from experimenting in the first place, and proven
treatment programs that help those who seek assistance to stay off drugs.
(Possible legislation includes: Drug-Free Schools, Drug-Free workplace and
Drug-Free Prisons.)

Stopping Supply -- Controlling our borders is crucial.  We must stop
supply by eradicating and interdicting illegal drugs at their source,
intercepting them at our borders and trafficking networks at home.
(possible legislation includes: Drug-Free Border and Drug-Free
Hemispheres. )



Increasing Accountability -- Government at all levels must be empowered to
win the War on Drugs and held accountable for results.  Precious resources
must be maximized to achieve results, and hard targets should be imposed
on the Drug Czar so that the American people can measure the success and
failure of our policies. American business must also be empowered and
held accountable for stopping the multi-billion dollar drug trade.
(Possible legislation includes: Drug Czar Reauthorization and Drug-Free
Money Laundering.)


