RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael CohenjOU=OPDjO=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATEjTIME:27-APR-1998 12:19:10.00

SUBJECT:   more

TO: Laura Emmett    ( CN=Laura EmmettjOU=WHOjO=EOP @ EOP   [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena KaganjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD     1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please send me back the revised set when its done.


Q.      What does the Administration believe is the right way to reform
bilingual education?

A.       The right way is to strengthen o~r public schools overall and improve
how our schools help Limited English Proficient (LEP) students learn
English:
   We can help LEP kids learn English and do well in academic subjects if
we give them the same tools that other students need in order to succeed:
higher standards, safe schools, smaller classes, well prepared teachers,
and a challenging curriculum, and schools that are accountable for
success.   This is what the Administration is already trying to help
schools in every state and community accomplish.

 No one approach to educating LEP students works best all the time; we
must give local schools the flexibility to fashion an approach that will
work the best for their students.

 We must provide LEP students with fully qualified bilingual and
English-as-second-Ianguage teachers.  LEP students will succeed if they
are given well-prepared teachers who know how to teach reading and who are
knowledgeable about second-language acquisition.

 Local school districts must be accountable for performance and results.
School districts should be accountable for helping students become
proficient in English as rapidly as possible.   They should measure
progress' regularly, report publicly on how well they are doing, and take
corrective action if students are not making adequate progress.

 If we do these things, we can expect students to meet a goal of becoming
proficient in English within 3 years.  This is a reasonable goal--many
students can learn English faster than they do at present if we set clear
expectations and give them the qualified teachers and the help they need.
A goal is not a mandate or a one-year straight-jacket; if a student needs
additional time, he or she should get it, along with the help and support
to learn.  But, setting a clear goal will help students and teachers
alike. "Like setting high standards, students can achieve more when they
know we expect more of them.


