RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CERDA_J )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1998 11:18:45.22

SUBJECT: COURT GIVES FEDERAL JUDGES INCREASED POWER IN DRUG ....

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED_B   Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Jose Cerda III                            CERDA J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ:NOT READ

  TEXT:
  Date: 04/28/98 Time: 10:39
  SCourt gives federal judges increased power in drug sentencing
      WASHINGTON (AP)    The Supreme Court today gave federal judges
  greater power to impose longer terms behind bars for some convicted
  drug traffickers, unanimously upholding the prison sentences given
  to five Illinois men.
      Writing for the court, Justice Stephen G. Breyer said it does
  not matter that a federal jury did not make clear whether it found
  the men guilty of conspiring to distribute cocaine in its powder or
  --crack"   form. The sentencing judge was free, Breyer said, to
. sentence the men as if they had been convicted of dealing in both
  illegal drugs.
      Under federal sentencing guidelines, the punishment for
  crack-related crimes is much tougher than crimes linked to powder
  cocaine.
      Vincent Edwards, Reynolds Wintersmith, Horace Joiner, Karl Fort
  and Joseph Tidwell were convicted in 1993 for their participation
  in a drug-selling conspiracy based in Rockwell, Ill.
      The trial judge told jurors they could convict the men of
  violating a federal drug-conspiracy law if prosecutors proved they
  were involved with measurable amounts of powdered cocaine --or"
  crack cocaine.
      After the jury found the men guilty of participating in an
  illegal conspiracy, the judge sentenced them based on his finding
  that the illegal conduct had involved both cocaine and crack.
      Fort and Wintersmith were sentenced to life in prison. The other
  three received prison sentences ranging from 10 to 26 years, and a
  federal appeals court upheld all five sentences.
      All five men appealed, contending that they were entitled to
  shorter sentences or even a new sentencing proceeding. But today's
  ruling rejected those arguments.
       --The judge was authorized to determine for sentencing purposes
  whether crack, as well as cocaine, was involved, " Breyer said,
  adding that the jury's belief about which drugs were involved was
'beside the point.
      The case is Edwards vs. U.S., 96-8732.
  APNP-04-28-98 1039EDT


