RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( SHlMABUKUR L      (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1998 19:49:02.53

SUBJECT: HOUSE REPUBLICANS UNVEIL ANTI-DRUG STRATEGY

TO: Jose Cerda III                            CERDA J      Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B } Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Michelle Crisci                           CRISCI M     Autoforward to: Remote Address
READ: NOT READ

TO: Robin J. Bachman                          BACHMAN R     Autoforward to: Remote Addres
READ: NOT READ

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro                     SHlMABUKUR L } Autoforward to: Remote Add
READ: NOT READ

  TEXT:
  Date: 04/30/98 Time: 17:53
  RHouse Republicans unveil anti-drug strategy
      WASHINGTON (AP)    Saying the war on drugs will be the highest
  priority of the Republican-led Congress, House Speaker Newt
  Gingrich led a GOP rally Thursday outlining a broad legislative
  agenda to reduce illegal use.
      In the next several months, Republican leaders announced, they
  will bring to the floor bills to double border patrol guards, link
  foreign aid to drug-fighting efforts, increase penalties for
 "methamphetamine traffickers and money launderers and restrict loan
  eligibility for students convicted of drug possession.
      Gingrich told a room packed with lawmakers, youngsters and
  representatives of anti-drug groups that he would calIon the House
 Appropriations Committee to make anti-drug money their first
  priority. "We will cut any other program we have to cut" to focus
  on the goal of beginning to win the war on drugs by 2002.
      Lawmakers wore blue ribbons, the symbol of their campaign, and
" lined up to sign a declaration committing to work for a drug-free
  nation.
      Democrats, who did not participate in the task force putting
  together the package, accused Republicans of being more interested
  in scoring election-year political points than working together to
  combat drugs.
      "If we're making a political football out of it ... and letting
 pollsters, you know, tell us how to gain the high ground on an
  issue, that doesn't get us anywhere. That's self-defeating,"   said
  House Democratic leader Dick Gephardt.
      Barry McCaffrey, the White House drug policy chief, told The
 Associated Press he was "surprised and pleased"     at what he
  thought was the bipartisan tone and positive energy that came out
  of the GOP rally.
      "They want an acceleration in our own timetable, " he said.
  "We will consider their ideas carefully.' ,


    President Clinton in February outlined the administration's plan
to cut illegal drug use in half over the next decade by expanding
anti-drug coalitions, increasing police and border guards,
improving treatment programs and other measures also included in
the Republican plan.
    The GOP task force chief, Rep. Dennis Hastert, R-III., said
their legislation was aimed at deterring demand, stopping supply
and increasing personal accountability.
    Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Fla., chairman of the House Judiciary
crime subcommittee, said one goal was to cut the availability of
illegal drugs by 80 percent over the next three years.
    Among the proposed Republican ideas:
     Encouraging lawmakers to help establish community-based
anti-drug coalitions.                        .
     Doubling to $20 million the annual budget to help local groups
reduce teen-age drug abuse.
     Grants to implement drug-free workplace programs.
     Restricting federal loans for students convicted of drug
possession or trafficking.
     Building more fences and doubling border guards along the
Mexican border.
     Providing U.S. assistance for foreign drug-eradication
programs, and linking aid to drug-fighting efforts.
     Life imprisonment for trafficking in speed, or methamphetamine.
     Increasing money for drug money-laundering.
    The House kicked off its anti-drug campaign Wednesday when it
passed legislation that would permanently ban federal money for
needle exchanges. The White House earlier announced it was
extending the current ban on federal funding, but upset GOP
lawmakers by agreeing with studies showing that local needle
exchange programs have slowed the spread of AIDS.
APNP-04-30-98 1754EDT


