RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.     ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1998 15:28:04.00

SUBJECT:   Staff Morale

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I want to make both of you aware that staff morale is somewhat at a low
level.    A large part of this beyond our control (White House scandals,
family problems, a do-nothing Congress, Spring blues, long hours, people
growing beyond their jobs, etc.).   However, there are some things we can
do.   For my part,  I need to find a new support staffer for the Education
Team and continue to encourage people to take time off and to structure
their hours more effectively. There are some things you both can do as
well.

1. Staff Meetings:   Please don't underestimate the importance of the
bi-weekly staff meeting.   For many staffers this is their only contact
with each of you.  I know these meetings can be tiresome, and we can
certainly try to cut down their length (they should go past 1/2 hour), but
your presence is important, especially with tobacco increasingly
dominating your schedules.

2.   Interaction With The President and Vice President: Nothing
rejuvenates morale more than contact with the President and the Vice
President. When it is appropriate, taking staff to briefings goes a long
way.   Including the appropriate staffers name on a Presidential
memorandum would also help people feel connected and improve the work
product.

3. Travel: We have a very large, unused travel budget. While the three
of use may not like to get out on the road, many junior staff would
benefit from some travel.  I encourage staff to travel whenever they can,
but some encouragement from you both would help greatly.

4. Summer Vacations:      Please encourage staff to take significant   summer
vacations.

5. Positive Reinforcement: Recognizing individuals for their work is
incredibly important right now. With a few exceptions, I think a lot of
staff feel disconnected from the main work of the DPC (getting tobacco
passed). Again, a little goes a long way.   Sending congratulatory e-mails
or voice-mails hetps.


