RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Amy W. Tobe ( CN=Amy W. Tobe/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-MAY-1998 10:40:39.00

SUBJECT:   1998-04-30 INTERNAL Interview of the President by Al Hunt

TO: June G. Turner    CN=June G. Turner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: David C. Leavy ( CN=David C. Leavy/OU=NSC/O=EOP @ EOP [ NSC 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO : CROWLEY P   CROWLEY P @ A1 @ CD @ VAXGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 ) (NSC)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP     [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Eleanor S. Parker ( CN=Eleanor S. Parker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jake Siewert ( CN=Jake Siewert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sara M. Latham ( CN=Sara M. Latham/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: RUBIN_E ( RUBIN E @ A1 @ CD @ VAXGTWY [   UNKNOWN 1 )   (NSC)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Ernmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
this is embargoed. Hunt will give me the green light when he wants us to
put this out.   It's just fyi. (NSC: pIs be sure to share with Steinberg
et al.) THanks.


---------------------- Forwarded by Amy W. Tobe/WHO/EOP on 05/01/98 10:16
AM ---------------------------



        SUNTUM M @ Al
        04/30/98 05:24:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject: 1998-04-30 INTERNAL Interview of the President by Al Hunt




                            THE WHITE HOUSE

                      Office of the Press Secretary

Internal Transcript                                   April 30, 1998


                     INTERVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT
           BY AL HUNT OF THE WALL STREET JOURNAL AND CNBC


                          The Roosevelt Room


3:24 P.M. EDT


             Q    Mr. President, thank you for being with us.  Let's
talk about the American economy for a moment, which is really the
envy of the world today.  Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan
says that it's the best economy in modern memory. But in your view,
are there one or two developments that could jeopardize these good
'times?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think the thing that I'm most
concerned about today is the necessity of having growth in every
major region of the world to sustain our own.  I mean, we're now in a
position where about a third of our growth is due to exports, where a
significant percentage of them go to Asia. And our own analyses are
that the Asian financial crisis, within its present parameters, won't
have a terribly destructive impact on the American economy now.  But
if we had slow growth everywhere at once, it would, which is why I
think it's other important that we support the IMF and have a really
disciplined effort to try to help move the Asian countries through
this financial period and get them back to growth again.

              And I feel the same way about what I'm trying to do in
,Africa as well.  I just think that we have to understand that our
 welfare is more inextricably tied with others than ever before. So
 that's one of the things that I'm quite concerned about.

             Q    In that context, the greatest threat in Asia, most
experts think, is Japan.  You and Secretary Rubin have encouraged,
have cajoled, have pressured the Japanese to try to stimulate their


economy, where it always seems to be too little, too late. What are
the consequences if that persists, both in Asia and for the United
States?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me say, this last stimulus
package, if it's real, that is, if it's real money and it's
implemented rapidly and vigorously, I think it will be a plus --

            Q       You think it's sufficient

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think -- let me finish, if I
might.  I think that it might be enough on its own terms if, in
addition to that, they have other reforms in the economy, you know,
to open the economy, to subject it to more genuine competition and
open markets. Then I think between the two of those things you would
really get growth going again.  I think at least there is a chance
that it is.

              One of the problems that the Japanese have in their
political system is that, because the pressures against doing these
kinds of things are so enormous, very often they can be proposed and
then their. impact can be watered down or delayed in ways that make it
difficult to implement. But if they actually do what the Prime
Minister has proposed and they do it quickly, and they follow it up
with other reforms with banking and competitive market reforms, then
0,

I think that there is a chance we can see some real movement in
Japan. And, of course, that would lead the whole region out.

             And Prime Minister Hashimoto has got an enormously
difficult challenge now, but he's a very able man, he's a strong man,
and he's trying to, I think, really come to grips with this. And I'm
hoping that.he'll be able to.

              Q    You're going to China for almost a week this
summer.   Is there any chance you'd stop over in Tokyo to talk to the
Jal?anese about this economic situation?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I hope to see Prime Minister
Hashimoto for an extended period in Birmingham, in England at the G-8
meeting before I go to China.  I would not like to wait that long.
I'd like to have the chance to really sit down and visit with him and
see what, if anything else, we can do to help before then. So I'm
looking forward to blocking out some good time on my schedule when
we're together for the G-8 meeting.

             Q      And no reason then to go to Tokyo on your trip to
China?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, my instinct is to treat this as I
would another -- any other state visit, just to go and come. But I
have been to Japan a couple of times, and I expect to go back again
before I leave office. But I think what we need to do is to deal
with this financial challenge they face as old friends and allies in
a very straightforward way.  I don't think that the symbolism of a
visit is nearly as important as the reality of a partnership, and I'm
going to do my best to be a good partner to them.

             Q      You mentioned the meeting coming up in Birmingham,


England. What do you expect to come out of that other than a call
for more financial disclosure from other nations and the IMF? Is
there any more substantive --

             THE PRESIDENT:  Well, I hope so, because I think that we
really -- I hope we'll do a G-8 version of what we were doing at the
Summit of the Americas in Santiago.  I thought what we -- I hope
we'll be talking about how globalization can work to the benefit of
all the peoples in our countries, and then how it can only work if
we're benefiting other nations as well.

             Now, let me just give you an example. Great Britain now
has a low unemployment rate, and the Dutch unemployment rate is down,
but a number of the other European unemployment rates are still high,
even though theY're enjoying growth.  The Canadians have had strong
growth for the last couple of years.  Their unemployment rate is only
now beginning to yield to it.  So there is a lot of interest among
the G-8 about how they can generate more jobs without increasing
inequality and without undermining growth.

               So I expect we'll be talking about things like the
  earned income tax credit in the United States as a device for
  reducing inequality, but still increasing employment.  I know we'll
  spend a lot of time on the training of the work force and wealthy
. countries' significant obligation to upgrade the skills of their own
  people because of the change in the globalization of the economy.   So
  I think we'll have a lot of things that really affect people on the
  street in America and in these other countries.

             Q    Let me ask you a question about the European
Monetary Union, with I guess 11 countries coming together.  There has
been a lot of celebration of that.  Your administration has been very
supportive.  And yet, isn't there a concern that when you have
countries with such incredibly diverse cultural and social and
economic and political systems, that rather than lead to more unity
it could produce more unrest, more disunity?

0,

              THE PRESIDENT:  It could if people feel that it's been
sort of imposed on them.   But I believe that the general tendency
toward political and economic union in Europe is a positive one.   The
United States has supported it; I have personally supported it
strongly.   So I think that's positive.  I think the efforts made by
many European countries to get their fiscal house in order, get their
deficits down so they can qualify for membership, has been truly
impressive.

             And the European states themselves will have to decide
how they want to unify politically and economically, but if they
choose to do this European Monetary Union, I want to be supportive.
But I think that in order to make it work, they'll have to do other
things as well.  They'll have to find a way, first of all, within
their countries to preserve a sense of sovereignty and integrity in
these other countries while they're unifying the currency. And then,
in dealing with the United States and others, they will have to find
a way to continue to make sure that they're sending us the right
signal that they're opening their economy -- they're unifying, but
they're not clOSing others out, they're opening.  And we are in
negotiations and discussions with them now about how we might do


that.   So, on balance, I'm positive about this.

             Q    Let's return to the domestic economy for a second.
We now had six quarters where the economy has grown more rapidly than
even your most optimistic of advisors, the latest just being in the
last few days. But given the inevitable business cycle, do you think
it's time to at least start to consider tapping on the brakes so you
don't have to slam them on later?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think the only reason to tap on
the brakes with high growth and low inflation is if you think it will
actually prolong the period of growth.  And there is a lot of debate
out there in the world today about the nature of our growth and what
would stop it and what would keep it going.  So I think that the
judgment ought to be what are the mix of policies we can adopt that
are most likely to keep this period of economic growth going for the
longest period of time.

              I don't believe we've repealed the business cycle, but I
 think perhaps we've fundamentally altered it. That is, if you look
 at the impact of the technological revolution working through the
 economy, which is, I think, giving us higher productivity levels than
.we can measure accurately -- I think if you look at the globalization
 of commerce and America having still a relatively open economy, which
 keeps inflation down by having everything subject to more
 competition, if you look at the benefits we're reaping now from the
 painful adjustments that were made in the 1980s by the business
 community -- all these things happening now -- I think there is a
 chance that we now know it's more possible than it used to be for a
 government to have a prolonged period of growth if it's properly
 managed.

             Do I think that there is no business cycle and that the
laws of supply and demand in the global context never come back to
shorten the leash on a country? No.   I think it's still out there.
But I think we can continue to prolong this if we do the right
things.

             Q    Just to follow up for a moment, your predecessors
were always    several -- were quite critical of Chairman Greenspan
whenever he put brakes on.  Your administration, particularly
Secretary Rubin, have had very good ties with Chairman Greenspan.   Do
I take it from that answer that, whereas your not encouraging him to
tap on the brakes, that you wouldn't be critical if he did?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, we've tried to work together while
respecting our independence. And I have believed always that if I
provided America with a responsible budget that was moving toward
balance so that in the short-term we were behaving in a responsible
way, and that had the long-term investments necessary to triumph in
the kind of economy we live in, that that would permit him to do his
job with the lowest possible interest rates.  That is, I thought he
would be able to leave interest rates than he otherwise· would feel he
could.  I think on balance that's what's happened.

             I know that he couldn't possibly agree with every
decision I've made in the last five and a half years, and he put the
brakes on pretty tight in 1994, trying to keep this thing going. And
we had a big -- we had a pretty good slow-down, but then we were able
to keep it going, keep the expansion going. And so it's continued


right the way through until here we are, almost to the middle of '98.
And I believe that he'll do what he thinks is right for the long-term
interests of the American economy.

             Q    You were asked the other day at your news
conference about the stock market continuing to go up, and you were
an optimist.  If you were private citizen Clinton today, would you
invest in the market?

             THE PRESIDENT: Yes, but I would also recognize that it
goes down and it goes up and it goes down and it goes up. And what
the American people need to know is that if you can hold your
investments long enough, over any given 15- or 20-year period, the
stock market has always out-performed private -- I mean, government
bonds in earnings.

             The insecurity is if you enter, particularly if you
enter at a fairly high point now and you happen to get one of those
downward bumps and you have to liquidate your investment.  Then you
could lose.  But if you look at the stock market -- the stock market
has always tracked the fundamentals in the end.  And I just feel that
if I can work with the American people and keep the fundamentals
good, keep productivity up and investment for the long run up, keep
the unemployment rate down, keep the inflation rate down -- if we
keep the fundamentals in good shape, then the stock market, over
time, will track that.

             And I know that there are a lot of people who are
worried because it's gone quite high lately, but-the market -- they
correct themselves; they always do, one way or the other.  I just
think over the long run, what -- if you're President, you can't be
thinking about next month in the market, you have to be thinking
about what's the long-run economic scenario. And then you just have
to trust the market to follow the market realities in the American
economy over time.  I think that's what will happen.

             Q    In this booming economy, some critics have worried
that it's been too uneven.   I'll give you one example: The pay of
CEOs of the largest companies last year rose 35 percent, rose 54
percent the year before.   That's 13 times greater than the pay of
average workers. And I think the figure now is that the average boss
earns 326 times what the average worker earns.   Is that, a,
acceptable; and, b, should government do anything about it?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think that in and of itself,
it's probably a phenomenon of companies bidding for management talent
at a time when management talent is important in how these companies
do in the market.  So, in that sense, it may not be any different
than asking whether it's acceptable that professional athletes earn
as much money as they do.

             I think the real question is, are working people earning
a fair share of their company's prosperity and their country's
prosperity. And are we, in the aggregate, decreasing the level of
income and equality that developed over the last 20 years, because we
had a very -- as you know, very sharp increase in inequality among
various classes of working people, with folks on the bottom getting
the short end of the stick. Government policies I think had
something to do with it, but I think the larger thing was that we
were changing the dominant economic factors of this age. And now the


dominant economic factors relate to people's level of education and
skills, so that there became -- there's a huge education premium now
in the work force, and people that don't have it, particularly
younger workers, tend to get punished very harshly by the low incomes
they earn.

             So, to me, what I've tried to do is to reduce income
inequality -- not necessarily by reducing upper-income people's
incomes, except to ask them to pay their fair -- what I believe is a
fair share of the country'B tax burden -- but instead, by lowering
the incomes of the lower 40 percent of the people and trying to
create more high-wage jobs by tying more of them to trade, because we
know trade-related jobs and technology-related jobs pay l7 to 20
percent more than average wages. And the evidence is that in the
last couple of years we have slowly, finally, begun to reduce income
inequality, particularly when you take into account the impacts of
the earned income tax credit, which is worth about $l,OOO a year to a
working family of four with an income under $30,000.

             Q    Another of the benefits of the booming economy, of
course, has been we have something that people thought unimaginable a
few years ago, a budget surplus. The latest CBO estimate I think was


            THE PRESIDENT:   Well, we hope we do.   We think we will.

             Q    But with April receipts coming in I gather much
stronger than anybody anticipated, I've now heard some people suggest
you could have a budget surplus of as much as $50 billion this year.
Is that right? Is that reasonable?

            THE PRESIDENT:   Could be.

             Q    Could be that high? Now, you have said that you're
going to veto -- that Social Security comes first with any budget
surplus.  If they try and enact a big tax cut before they do that,
that you would veto it. But there's also a big spending highway pork
bill coming down the pike right now. As things stand now, would you
also veto that?

             THE PRESIDENT:  If it got into the surplus.   I met with
Senator Lott and Senator Daschle yesterday and we discussed this.
And it's very interesting -- historically, always highways have been
the one thing that Congress, whether Republican or Democrat, they
always want to spend more on than the President. And part of it is
the President's desire to maintain some control over the budget -- at
least for me that's been the case. Now, I like the -- I believe we
need to invest money in infrastructure -- in highways and mass
transit and bridge repair.  I think it's good for the economy in
terms of the jobs it creates, but it's even better for the economy in
terms of giving people safer roads to travel on and less wear and
tear on their cars, less accidents    fewer accidents -- the whole
thing.  I'm all for this.

             And we need more mass transit because, among other
things, it's an important part of the welfare reform component.  If
we're requiring people who are poor and on welfare to go take jobs
and they have to travel, theY've got to have some way to get there.
So I'm for a hefty increase in investment in infrastructure.


             But I think that these bill that have been passed, the
thing the bothers me is, I can't see, based on what I understand to
be the options, how either one of these bill can be funded without
either getting into the surplus or cutting our investment in
education, medical research, the environment, and other critical
areas. So we're just going to have to try to find a way to fit all
these things in in a manner that doesn't spend the surplus.

             Q    Let me ask you just a couple more quick questions.
On Social Security, you've said very clearly you don't want to have a
specific proposal now.  But some of your Democratic colleagues --
Senator Moynihan and Kerrey, are talking about private accounts
alongside traditional Social Security. No matter the specific
details, is that a good idea to consider?

             THE PRESIDENT: Absolutely, it should be considered.
But what I want to say -- I'd like to make two points -- first is the
reason that I think it would be a bad thing for me to have a specific
proposal now is I think it would shut down debate rather than
increase it. And then everything would be, are you for or against
this proposal. Right now, we've still -- the American people I
think, on this issue -- the good news is that everybody knows
something fairly substantial is going to have to be done to make thi's
system survive into the 21st century when all the baby boomers
retire. That's good.

             Secondly, I think the younger people are, the more
likely they are to be open to all kinds of new ideas, and that's
good. But I think that what has not been accomplished yet in the
public education process that we're now undertaking this year is for
people to understand the tradeoffs involved in making a set of
choices.

             That is, I could call you on the telephone, and I could
say I am a reporter for the Clinton polling agency, and I'm going to
ask you these 10 questions and do'you like these ideas, and you might
like them all.  But if I said, you can only have four of them, and
then you have to rank them in rank order of priority, that's a much
more sophisticated judgment. That's what I'm trying to get done now.

             On the individual accounts, I think it's absolutely, an
idea that deserves a lot of consideration.  There is some debate, as
you know, in Congress about trying to dedicate the surplus to
individual accounts now just starting. The problem I have with that
proposal is that it doesn't deal with the underlying Social Security
program. What are you going to do -- I think we still need some
baseline Social Security in the 21st century that's a baseline
protection for people that may not have a lot of money in the market,
or may lose some in the market, or don't have a chance to accumulate
a lot of wealth, and we've got to know how we're going to fix that.
And then, the people -- admittedly, that's what Senators Moynihan and
Kerrey tried to do.  They tried to guarantee a baseline Social
Security benefit and, over and above that, have an individual
account. And that's one of the things that I think ought to be fully
explored here.

             Q    We only have a few more minutes, but as long as
we're talking about whether things are good or bad, there have been a
rash of big mergers lately, particularly in the financial service
banks. Do you think generally, without commenting on anyone, but as


a general proposition, is that good or bad for consumers and the
economy?

             THE PRESIDENT:   I don't know yet. I think to some
extent, they were inevitable because of both the nationalization of
finance, bank finance across our whole country, and the globalization
of commerce, which puts a premium on bigness partly so you can afford
to get into new market areas, partly so you can afford to handle bad
years -- you have more money.

             So I think some of this is inevitable.  I think that the
test which ought to be applied -- and I honestly have not had time to
get a detailed analysis of it -- but the test of all these mergers
ought to be this:  Does it allow them to become more globally
competitive in ways that don't unfairly raise prices or cut the
quality of service to consumers in America? Or does it superficially
allow them to become more globally competitive, but, in effect,
undermine their competitive position because they're not attractive
to their customers anYmore because of what happens to prices or
service?

             And I think that's the test we ought to apply, that's
the test government agencies ought to apply, in terms of any
lawfulness -- you know they're looking at that.  But I think it's too
soon to say yet. On balance, I think it was inevitable.   I think
these things were coming, and we have to do what we can to make sure
that they're good for the consumers of the country.

             Q    Next to the last question, on tobacco, would you be
willing to give up some of the initiatives that you have proposed as
part of the tobacco deal in order to get legislation that limits any
revenue strictly to tobacco and health related areas?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me say, first of all, most of
the initiatives that I proposed to fund -- in education, for example
-- were not coming out of tobacco revenues, except those that were
being collected to be sent back to the states.

             Now, I wanted to say that those should be spent for the
benefit of children and smaller class sizes in the earlier grades and
in child care, and not children's health, for the simple reason that
in the Balanced Budget Act we had the biggest increase in children's
health in 35 years.

             If Congress wanted to give the states some more
flexibility in spending that money, we could argue about that, but
that wouldn't be a deal breaker for me. We can also have a debate
about that in the election, whether I was right or they were right
and what we should do with the priorities in the future.

             My sole concern, in terms of what bill I would sign or
not, is the question of whether it will substantially reduce teenage
smoking and thereby lift the health fortunes of all these children
that are otherwise going to be imperiled.

             Q      Do you think the McCain bill does that, is that
correct?

             THE PRESIDENT:  I do.  I do.  There are a couple things
that if I were writing the McCain bill I'd change and maybe we can


even get a few changes in it. And I'm sure there are people on the
other side who would like to change a couple things about it. But I
think that the McCain bill is -- I think Senator McCain and the
Democrats and Republicans who worked with him -- keep in mind, 19
people voted for that bill -- made an honest effort to, first of all,
protect our children from the dangers of tobacco; secondly, raise
enough money that we can invest it in an advertising campaign and
medical research and to do the things that ought to be done from a
health point of view; took decent care of the tobacco farmers, gave
them an opportunity to buy their way out of what they are doing now
in ways that seem to find favor among the farmers; and basically did
the kinds of things that ought to be done.  It;s certainly a good
vehicle through which we can work to try to get a bill out of the
Senate and then hopefully get one out of the House.

             Q    Last question. One of the reasons the economy has
done so well is unsurpassed consumer confidence.  Consumers really
feel good about how things are going in general.  If you and
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr become embroiled in a huge
high-stakes battle over impeachment charges and counter charges,
could that threaten or jeopardize consumer confidence in general?

             THE PRESIDENT: Oh, I don't think so, because, for one
thing, I've done my best to demonstrate to the American people that
I'm letting all this business from Mr. Starr be handled by my lawyers
and others speaking on my behalf, that when I have to answer
questions about it, I do, but that I'm working on their business.
And I'm very optimistic about it.  So I don't think that anything
that can conceivably happen is likely to impact on consumer
confidence -- unless somebody tries to do something completely
irresponsible and insupportable. By the facts at hand, we're going
to be fine on that.

                   Q     Or impact upon your stewardship of --

             THE PRESIDENT: No.   No.  I think that early on in this
process I was somewhat bewildered by it and it was distracting. And
finally, I decided what lowed the American people was not to be
distracted, and so I'm doing pretty well now, and I intend to keep
right on doing it.

                   Q     Mr. President, thank you very much.

                   THE PRESIDENT:   Thank you.

                   END                           3:50 P.M. EDT




Message Sent
TO:~   ____   ~~   ____________________________________________________
Brenda M. Anders
Nanda Chitre
Douglas B. Sosnik
david t. johnson
Joseph P. Lockhart
Laura D. Schwartz
Michael McCurry
megan moloney


Jonathan Murchinson
Elizabeth R. Newman
Julia M. Payne
Joshua Silverman
Amy W. Tobe
Barry J. Toiv
Michael Waldman
terri tingen
Lori_Anderson @ OA.EOP.GOV@INET@LNGTWY
RUBIN E @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
darby_E._stott @ oa.eop.gov@INET@LNGTWY
SUNTUM M @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
WOZNIAK N @ Al@CD@LNGTWY


