     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Bruce-N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAY-1998 19:05:02.00

     SUBJECT:   Tough negotiator at work

     TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Did you see this from the Al Hunt interview last week?


           Q    Next to the last question, on tobacco, would you be
     willing to give up some of the initiatives that you have proposed as
     part of the tobacco deal in order to get legislation that limits any
     revenue strictly to tobacco and health related areas?

                  THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me say, first of all, most of
     the initiatives that I proposed to fund -- in-education, for example
     -- were not corning out of tobacco revenues, except those that were
     being collected to be sent back to the states.

                  Now, I wanted to say that those should be spent for the
     benefit of children and smaller class sizes in the earlier grades and
     in child care, and not children's health, for the simple reason that
     in the Balanced Budget Act we had the biggest increase in children's
     health in 35 years.

                  If Congress wanted to give the states some more
     flexibility in spending that money, we could argue about that, but
     that wouldn't be a deal breaker for me.  We can also have a debate
     about that in the election, whether I was right or they were right
     and what we should do with the priorities in the future.

                  My sale concern, in terms of what bill I would sign or
     not, is the question of whether it will substantially reduce teenage
     smoking and thereby lift the health fortunes of all these children
     that are otherwise going to be imperiled.

                  Q      Do you think the McCain bill does that, is that
     correct?

                  THE PRESIDENT:  I do.  I do.  There are a couple things
     that if I were writing the McCain bill I'd change and maybe we can
     even get a few changes in it. And I'm sure there are people on the
     other side who would like to change a couple things about it. But I
     think that the McCain bill is -- I think Senator McCain and the
     Democrats and Republicans who worked with him -- keep in mind, 19
     people voted for that bill -- made an honest effort to, first of all,
     protect our children from the dangers of tobacco; secondly, raise
     enough money that we can invest it in an advertising campaign and
     medical research and to do the things that ought to be done from a
     health point of view; took decent care of the tobacco farmers, gave
     them an opportunity to buy their way out of what they are doing now
,,~




in ways that seem to find favor among the farmers; and basically did
the kinds of things that ought to be done.  It's certainly a good
vehicle through which we can work to try to get a bill out of the
Senate and then hopefully get one out of the House.


