        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

        CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAY-1998 12:20:12.00

        SUBJECT:     I-pager to review (My recommended additions are in bold, my recommended de

        TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
         EDUCATION


                O&Every American who is willing to work and study hard can now
        afford college ... WeO,ve thrown open the doors to higher learning. Now,
        we must continue working to make sure all our children can walk through
        them and seize the opportunities of the future.   That is why in my
        balanced budget, I am proposing the largest commitment to K-12 education
        in history --a comprehensive plan to raise standards, raise expectations
        and raise accountability in our schools.OB

                                                                  President Bill
        Clinton
                                                                  February 20, 1998

        Building On The Largest Education Investment In 30 Years. President
        Clinton has made K-12 education a top priority --by taking steps to reduce
        class size, modernize and build new schools, set [pass] voluntary national
        standards through testing in 4th grade reading and 8th grade math,   end
        the practice of social promotion, and continue education reform. His plan
        builds on last yearO,s [1998's] budget allocations in higher education
        --the largest education investment in 30 years and the largest investment
        in higher education since the G.I. Bill in 1945.   The PresidentO,s plan:

        DO      Reduces Class Size. The PresidentO,s budget includes a $12.4 billion
        initiative over 7 years to help local schools provide small classes with
        well-prepared [qualified] teachers in the early grades.  The initiative
        will reduce class size in grades 1-3 to a nationwide average of 18, and
        will help local school districts hire an additional 100,000 well-prepared
        teachers, in order to help all children read well and independently by the
        end of the third grade.

        DO      Modernizes and Build Schools to Improve Student Learning.  In order for
        students to learn and compete in the global economy, schools must be
        well-equipped and able to accommodate smaller class sizes. The President
        is proposing federal tax credits to modernize and build more than 5,000
        new schools --half of this support will be allocated to the 100 school
        districts with the largest number of low-income students.

        00      Achieves High Standards and Helps Ends Social Promotion.   The
        PresidentO,s plan includes proposals to ensure that all students attend
        schools where high standards are taken seriously and kids are given the
        help they need to succeed.   [No child should be allowed to pass to the
        next grade unless he or she has mastered the material.] [The PresidentO,s
        plan includes proposals to ensure that all students attend schools where
'"
 high standards are taken seriously and kids are given the help they need
 to succeed.]  It supports the continued development and implementation of
 high national standards and national tests, and establishes educational
 opportunity zones in poor urban and rural communities to give students the
 tools and opportunities needed for success.  It also provides schools with
 guidelines on how to end social promotion, ensure that more students learn
 what they need the first time round, and help those who donD,t with extra
 tutoring and summer school. No child should be allowed to pass to the next
 grade unless he or she has mastered the material.

 DO      Expands Access to Safe After-School Care.  To help create safe,
 positive learning environments for American school-age children who lack
 adult supervision during a typical week, the President is proposing $1
 billion over five years for [to increase] the 21st Century Learning Center
 Program [by $800 million over five years] to support school-community
 partnerships that expand or establish quality programs providing
 after-school care for up to half a million children a year.

 DO       Bring Our Students and Schools into the Information Age [Optimizes
 Educational Technology]     The PresidentO,s plan provides new or expanded
 initiatives to ensure that all children have access to the D&information
 superhighwayOS, high-quality educational content on-line, and teachers
 with the training needed to make effetive use of technology. The plan also
 will broaden access to high quality learning opportunities for adults
 using the Internet and other new technologies.

DO      Inspires Young People.  The PresidentD,s plan includes a new 0& High
HopesOS initiative to inspire young people to have high expectations of
themselves, ~o study hard, and to go to college.  The initiative promotes
partnerships between colleges and middle or junior high schools in
low-income communities to help teach students how they can go to college
by informing them about college options, academic requirements, costs, and
financial aid, and by providing support services --including tutoring,
counseling, and mentoring.


