RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAY-1998 16:59:48.00

SUBJECT:   Sunday Front Page Story in Louisville

TO: Mary L. Smith (CN;Mary L. Smith/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Growers less eager to support tobacco
                                               industry

                    By Gail Gibson
                    HERALD-LEADER WASHINGTON BUREAU

                    Always before, when Big Tobacco had a big fight on its
hands, it could
                    count on tobacco farmers for help.

                    In work shirts and John Deere caps, the nation's growers
put a sympathetic
                 public face on issues like increasing cigarette taxes or
regulating nicotine. In
                 sheer numbers, they guaranteed clout -- particularly with
southern
                 lawmakers.

                    But as cigarette makers battle now against a tough $516
billion
                    anti-smoking measure in Congress, they are having to
persuade the
                    country's 124,000 growers to join their fight.

                    So far,   it hasn't been an easy sell.

                 The legislation that the companies oppose includes one
key provision that
                 farmers like -- $28.5 billion in aid for tobacco growers
and rural
                 communities who would be hurt if fewer and fewer
Americans smoke.

                    And beyond that economic help,        some farmers say that they
have grown
                    more wary of the cigarette makers they were quick to


support in the past.
                 The split traces to last summer, when farmers learned
that the tobacco
                 companies had negotiated a $368.5 billion legal
settlement with state
                 lawyers and public health groups, without involving the
growers.

                      "There's some bitterness and some resentment," said Rod
Kuegel, a
                      Daviess County tobacco farmer and president of the
Lexington-based
                      Burley Tobacco Growers Cooperative Association.

                  "I appreciate where they are," J. Phil Carlton, the
industry's top lobbyist,
                  said in an interview last week. "They've been courted
long and hard (by
                  health groups and the White House), and in a sense, you'
re asking a lot of
                  them to say, 'Work with us now to help beat this bill,
and we'll help you
                  later. '

                      In North Carolina a week ago, the companies did just
that.

                 At the Sheraton Airport Plaza Hotel, top industry
executives met for about
                 four hours behind closed doors with about 100 growers and
farm leaders
                 from across the South.

                  The meeting included Nick Brookes, chairman     of
Louisville-based Brown
                  & Williamson Tobacco Co.; Philip Morris USA     chief
executive Michael
                  Szymanczyk; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. chief     executive
Andrew
                  Schindler; and Lorrilard chairman Alexander     Spears.

                      Carlton said the point of the April 23 meeting, where he
served as
                 moderator, was to explain to growers how the current
tobacco bill would
                 ruin the industry; and to ask for help in defeating it.

                      By various accounts, the farm groups in the audience were
polite, listened
                      attentively and asked questions. The growers agreed with
the industry
                      executives on some points. But the two sides didn't walk
out in lock step.

                      "You go to this meeting, and all of a sudden people stand
up and say,    'Oh,
                  you're our best friends -- drop everything you're doing
and come help us,' "
                  said Arnold Hamm, vice president of the Flue-Cured To
bacco Cooperative


                   Stabilization Corp. in Raleigh.

                   Hamm said farm groups oppose large parts ot McCain's
tobacco
                   legislation, which is headed for the Senate floor May 18.
But many growers
                   also want some comprehensive legislation that would offer
them greater
                 ·certainty about their future. They're still deciding
whether the bill could
                  somehow be improved in their view.

                 "To say we're going to fall in line and fight whatever
we're told to fight --
                 particularly if there's something in there that benefits
farmers -- well, I guess
                 we're going to listen to our conscience," Hamm said.

                   Tim Cansler, national affairs director for the Kentucky
Farm Bureau
                 Federation, said the cigarette makers "ran into a more
politically astute
                 group" at the Charlotte meeting than they have in the
past.

                 "I'm just not so sure we're ready to carry their water --
all the water they've
                 got to carry," Cansler said.

                   A change   in attitude

                   There was a time when the growers would have been ready.
President
                 Clinton saw that firsthand during his 1996 re-election
campaign. Before a
                 Clinton rally in Paducah that August, farmers held their
own rally to protest
                 Clinton's plan to regulate nicotine as a drug.

                   Speakers condemned the plan as a threat to the livelihood
of hard-working
                   farmers. Organizers, which included tobacco companies and
the Farm
                 Bureau, brought Indy car-racing legend A.J. Foyt to the
stage, and country
                 musician Charlie Daniels spoke to the crowd by satellite.

                 Daniels sang about the hard life farmers face and said
Clinton should leave
                 them alone, bringing a cheer from the crowd.

                 It was a far different scene when Clinton came to
Kentucky less than a
                 month ago to press his case for adopting a national
tobacco policy -- one
                 day after cigarette makers had walked away from efforts
to shape a deal,
                 saying Congress was seeking a greedy and unrealistic tax
increase on
                 cigarettes.



                 Tobacco farmers gathered in a tiny, smoke-filled
restaurant next door to the
                 Kentuckiana Tobacco Warehouse where Clinton spoke. Some
grumbled
                 about the president and his tough stand against tobacco.
A few held Old
                 West-style flyers, printed by the tobacco companies, that
blasted the
                 McCain bill.

                 But the only organized protest during Clinton's visit to
Carrollton came from
                 a group of Brown & Williamson plant workers. Farm
leaders, including
                 Kuegel and Farm Bureau President Bill Sprague, were cautio
usly optimistic
                 about Clinton's promise that growers would not be
forgotten.

                    "You almost made my speech for me there earlier," Sprague
told the
                    president after Clinton spoke at length about how tobacco
has preserved
                    small farms and that those farmers deserve protection.

                    Larry Forgy, a Lexington lawyer who has long been
prominent in
                 Republican politics, said Clinton's visit was simply part
of an effort to drive
                 a wedge between farmers and the cigarette makers.

                    The growers should realize,   "if these companies go down,
unfortunately the
                    growing community ... goes down too," said Forgy, who
represented the
                    burley co-op for 10 years and now is working for Brown &
Williamson in
                    its fight against the McCain bill.

                    Carlton echoes his point: "These companies want very much
to buy
                 tobacco from these farmers; they cannot do that if the
McCain bill passes."

                The same theme is being repeated in a sophisticated
advertising campaign
                 that the tobacco companies began in the past few weeks in
key
                 tobacco-growing states, including Kentucky. A nationwide
campaign
                 started last week.

                    For the companies, much is at stake in their efforts to
win over the farm
                    community.

                 "I think it.'s very important for them to have the
growers, because if you
                 look at it over the years, the one thing that kept the


  companies viable on
                   Capitol Hill was the growers," said Scott Ballin, a seni
. or policy analyst for
                   the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, and a longtime
  anti-smoking
                   lobbyist.

                 "What this industry has always done, when their
credibility is down, they
                 use other groups to do their dirty work," Ballin said.

                  Others closer to the fields say the same.

                 "As long as it's just those five companies out there,
they're going to have a
                 hard time finding friends," said Joe Wright, a tobacco
farmer from
                 Breckinridge County. Wright also has been involved with
the issue at close
                 range, as a past president of the burley co-op and a
former state Senate
                 Majority Leader and Democratic congressional candidate.

                 But in Wright's view, farmers do have some reason to
maintain ties to the
                 industry. The cigarette makers, after all, are the
farmers' customers, he said.

                 "The thing about it, Bill Clinton, a lot of these health
people, these political
                 people -- they're not going to be here to pick up the
pieces when it's all
                 over," Wright said.

                 For their part, the health people are trying to assure
farmers that they will
                 be around to help. Groups like the Campaign for
Tobacco-Free Kids have
                 been forging alliances with farm leaders for more than a
year.

                  "For us to try to cut the farmers off at the knees, and
try to. put them out of      .
                  business doesn't make sense," Ballin said.

                     The industry's Carlton dismisses the sentiment.

                     "I have a very difficult time believing that those people
 are any more
                     sympathetic to tobacco growers than they are to tobacco
 companies,   n

                     Carlton said.

                  Stuck in the middle of the tug-of-war, growers say they
 still are figuring out
                  their next move.

                     "It feels good to be wanted," said the burley co-op's
 Kuegel. "But when
                     your life is in the portals of the funeral home, it
oW      In




     doesn't feel that good."

                      All Contents . Copyright 1998 Lexington Herald-Leader.
     All Rights
                                               Reserved


