RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAY-1998 09:25:56.00

SUBJECT:   H1B and Regional Skills Alliances

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce/Elena:
Just to clarify a bit our discussion from yesterday:

We persuaded Kennedy to include Regional Skills Alliance is his bill that
was defeated in Committee. Abraham's bill includes a $50 million
scholarship program (funded through an appropriation). Our objective in
the House was for Smith's bill to include meaningful reform to the H1B
program (b/c that ·is where Abraham is most weak).  Peter concluded that
making changes to Abraham's training program would be the least difficult
thing for us to work out in conference. We did, however, want to make
sure that the House bill included a fee -- the Senate billd does not.    The
money generated from this fee is how we would want to fund any training
program.
Moran's Regional Skills Alliance proposal (which, like ours, was modeled
on the PPI idea) is very similar to what we included in our outline and in
Kennedy's bill. The principal differences are: (1) Moran's RSAs would be
administered' by Commerce rather than Labor; and (2) they would be required
to be led by industry (rather than just permitting industry to be part of
the RSA) .
Lofgren's current proposal would devote 80% of the money generated by the
fee to part D of Title IV of JTPA.   The provision is explicitly designed
to, among other things, "help alleviate skill shortages and enhance the
competitiveness of the labor force" and to fund programs (including
"partnership programs") that "address industry-wide skill shortages."
Thus, we concluded that RSAs could be funded through this (unless we
wanted to have the program administered by Commerce).   Peter thinks of the
Lofgren language as a placeholder that would allow us to build more
explicitly at conference.
I have asked Peter to follow up with others in Congress to ascertain the
more general (outside the House Judiciary committee) feeling about RSAs.
None of Moran's co-sponsors are on the Judiciary Committee.

julie
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 029 - FOLDER -005


[05/05/1998 - 05/06/1998]
