RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 17:12:20.00

SUBJECT:   here is the draft press paper ...

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOI'!N

TEXT:
A NATIONAL EFFORT TO REDUCE CLASS SIZE:
SMALLER CLASSES WITH WELL-PREPARED TEACHERS

May 8, 1998


The President spoke to the Delaware legislature to promote his
comprehensive education agenda, announce that he is transmitting
legislation to Congress today that would reduce class size to a national
average of 18 in grades 1-3, and highlight a new report released today by
the Education Department showing that smaller classes do lead to improved
student achievement.

REDUCING CLASS SIZE IN GRADES 1-3 TO NATIONWIDE AVERAGE OF 18. President
Clinton transmitted legislation today to help local schools provide
smaller classes with well-prepared teachers in the early grades. The
initiative would provide $12.4 billion over 7 years to help make sure that
every child receives personal attention, gets a solid foundation for
further learning, and learns to read independently and well by the end of
third grade. The initiative will reduce class size in grades 1-3 to a
nationwide average of 18 by providing funds to help local school districts
hire and pay the salaries of an additional 100,000 teachers.  States will
receive funds to boost teacher quality through teacher training,
recruitment, and testing, and new teachers will be required to pass state
competency tests.

NEW REPORT SHOWS THAT SMALL CLASSES MAKE A DIFFERENCE.  The President
announced anew Education Department report showing that reducing class
size, especially in the early grades, leads to improved student
achievement. According to the report -- which analyzed the data and
findings from the most carefully designed research studies on class size
-- the research shows that:

        Smaller class size increases student achievement. The report found that
        reducing class size from substantially above 20 students per class
to below 20     students leads to gains in student achievement with
the performance of the average student moving from the 50th
percentile to somewhere above the 60th percentile. Students from
smaller classes in initiatives from Burke County North Carolina,
Wisconsin, Indiana, and Tennessee outperformed their peers in larger
        classes. Follow-up studies showed that students from smaller
classes in              TennesseeD,s STAR Project continued to outperform their peer
in all academic         subjects even after returning to larger classes in
the 4th grade. An analysis of data on 10,000 4th graders in 203
school districts, and 10,000 8th graders in 182          school districts,


across the United States shows that students in smaller classes
        performed better in 4th grade and 8th grade than comparable
students in larger      classes.

        Smaller classes reduce discipline problems and increase
instruction     time for teachers. In Burke County, North Carolina, the
percentage of   classroom time devoted to instruction increased from
80 percent to 86 percent,       while the time devoted to
non-instructional activities such as discipline decreased        from 20
percent to 14 percent when class size was reduced. Students from
        TennesseeD,s STAR program were still working harder and causing
fewer           discipline problems than students from larger
classes even after the STAR             students returned to the
larger classroom in the 4th grade.

        Smaller classes with well-prepared teachers make a difference.
                Smaller classes will boost student achievement the most
when teachers are       prepared to teach well in these classes, and
efforts to reduce class size clearly    increase the demand for
qualified teachers. A review of more than 100 research          studies
indicated that positive effects of smaller classes were more likely if
        teachers change their instructional methods and classroom
procedures in the       smaller classes. Ciass size reduction efforts
resulting in student achievement        gains in Wisconsin and North Carolina
included a strong focus on professional         development for teachers.

        Smaller classes make the greatest impact in the early grades, and
for     disdvantaged and minority students. The clearest evidence of
positive        effects of smaller classes on student performance are in
the primary grades,     particularly kindergarten through third
grade. Research on class size reduction         efforts in Tennessee,
Indiana, Wisconsin, and North Carolina show clear               academic
gains for students in smaller classes through the third grade, while
        studies questioning the impact of class size have often focused on
class size '    variation across all grade levels.   The national study
of 10,000 4th graders and       10,000 8th graders found the greatest impact of
smaller classes on inner-city   youth.

ENFORCING ZERO TOLERANCE FOR GUNS IN SCHOOLS --Another report on the
Gun-Free Schools Act being issued by the Department of Education today
indicates that all states have now passed legislation providing for
students who bring firearms to school to be expelled for at least one
year. Although most schools do not report serious crimes to law
enforcement --and less than 1% of students report bringing a gun to school
--this new report shows that more than 6,000 students were disciplined for
bringing a firearm (i.e., handguns, rifles, bombs, etc.) to their schools
during the 1996-1997 school year. Most of these cases involved handguns
that were brought to high schools.

NEW LEGISLATION TO HELP STATES AND COMMUNITIES MEET THE CHALLENGE.
President Clinton is transmitting legislation to help states and
communities reduce class size in the early grades and help every child
read well and independently by the end of the third grade. His class size
initiative'also focuses on teacher quality and accountability for
results.

Small Classes With Well-Prepared Teachers. To master the basics and learn
to read well, students need teachers who are prepared to teach well in
smaller classes. President Clinton's class size reduction initiative will
help do this in grades 1-3 by:



Requiring State Teacher Competency Testing for New Teachers:  States would
be required to implement competency testing for new teachers.  Each state
would select the tests it determines is most appropriate for this
purpose. Most states have such tests.   Participating states and school
districts would also be required to ensure that individuals hired to fill
these new positions be either fully certified,or making satisfactory
progress toward full certification.  School districts could use funds to
provide teachers with the additional training needed to meet certification
requirements.

providing Funds for Teacher Training and Testing: At least 10% of the
funds in this initiative would be used to promote high quality teaching by
(1) training teachers in proven practices for teaching reading and in
effective practices in small classes; (2) providing mentors or other
support for newly hired teachers; (3) pro,viding incentives to recruit
qualified teachers to high poverty schools; and (4) testing new teachers
before they are hired and developing rigorous 'tests for beginning teachers.

Encouraging States to Adopt Rigorous Professional Tests and Upgrade
Teacher Certification Requirements.   Teachers should be able to
demonstrate that they know, the subject to be taught and have the necessary
knowledge and skills to help their students reach challenging state
academic standards.  States would be permitted to use a portion of their
funds to toughen teacher certification requirements and to require new
teachers to demonstrate competence.   For example, states could use these
funds to develop rigorous tests of subject matter expertise and
professional knowledge that prospective teachers would be required to pass
before they start teaching.

Holding Schools Accountable for Results -- Helping Every Child to Read
Well and Independently By the End of the Third Grade.  School districts
receiving these funds would be required to show that each school is making
measurable progress in improving reading achievement within 3 years, or
take necessary corrective actions --such as providing additional teacher
training, revising the curriculum, or implementing proven practices for
teaching reading.  School districts could lose funding if there is no
subsequent improvement in reading achievement in those schools.   School
districts would also be required to publish an annual school report card,
providing parents and taxpayers with clear information on student
achievement, class size, and teacher qualifications.

Targeting Funding to Areas of Greatest Need.  The PresidentD,s initiative
would distribute funds to states on the basis of the Title 1 formula.
Within the state, each high-poverty school district would receive the same
share of these funds as it received under Title 1, and the remaining funds
would be distributed within the state based on class size.  Matching funds
would be required from participating school districts, on a sliding scale
ranging from 0-50%, with high-poverty districts contributing the least.
Once a state has reached an average class size of 18 in grades 1-3, it
could use these funds to further reduce class size in the early grades, or
it could extend its efforts to other grades.

Providing Facilities for Additional Classrooms.  In order to help school
systems meet the need for additional classroom space, the President is (1)
proposing a $10 billion school modernization initiative over 10 years,
that will provide incentives for communities to invest in local school
facilities by leveraging $22 billion in bonds during 1999-2000; (2)
ensuring that changes to facilities in order to accommodate class size
reductions is an allowable use of school modernization funds; (3) allowing


for phased-in implementation of class size initiative to enhance
state/local planning.

Building on Successful Reforms in Arkansas.  As part of his comprehensive
education reforms while Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton reduced class
size in Arkansas to 20 in kindergarten and 23 in grades 1 through 3.  His
1983 education reform plan also included a statewide intensive training
program for elementary teachers and principals to improve teaching of
reading, as well as basic skills testing for new teachers and basic skills
~nd subject matter testing for experienced teachers.
    .
