RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-MAY-1998 19:06:12.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Hitt Letter

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Can you give me a quick pass on this?       I revised the sentence you noted -
see bold.

Dan Burkhardt wants to get the letter out.

Todd



Dear Dr. Hitt:

Thank you for your letter regarding needle exchange
programs and prevention in the fight to end the AIDS epidemic.

I am taking the concerns you have raised very seriously. We all know
that the rising incidence of HIV infection among those who use
injected drugs, and among their partners and children, is a major
factor in the continued growth of this epidemic.  Therefore, I will
continue to support retention of the HHS Secretary's authority to
decide whether to allow local communities to use federal funds for
needle exchange programs.

Recently, the Secretary released a report indicating that needle exchange
programs can help reduce HIV transmissions without encouraging
the use of illegal drugs.  This scientific analysis should be of great use
to those local and state officials that are considering the implementation
of needle exchange as part of their comprehensive HIV prevention
strategies.

At the same time, the Administration tried to prevent the politication of
the needle exchange
by keeping decision making at the local level.  Therefore, we are not at
this time
allowing for Federal funds to be used for such
programs. More must be done to help the general public and those
in Congress understand the role of needle exchange programs in our efforts
to fight both HIV and illegal drug use.

In the interim, the Office of National AIDS Policy, the Office of Drug
Control Policy,
and the Department of Health and Human Services will work together to
improve our efforts to stop the spread of H·IV among inj ection drug users,
their
partners, and their children.

I appreciate the passion that you and other members of the
Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS bring to the debate.       Be
assured that my commitment to ending this epidemic -- and to


responding to the needs of those already living with HIV and AIDS --
remains firm.  We must all work together to stop this deadly disease,
and I will take all measures within my authority to achieve that end.

Thank you again for sharing your concerns, and for your commitment to
bringing an end to this terrible epidemic.


