RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-MAY-1998 16:11:34.00

SUBJECT:   Conversation w/ Olivia re: TANF caseloads

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Cynthia and Olivia had a brief conversation yesterday, which I followed up
on today.  I think we have a workable approach--see if you agree.

Olivia had 3 concerns about gathering one additional quarter of TANF
caseloaddata from states and announcing March numbers at 5/27 event (we
have available, but have not announced, December numbers):
1. Sends mixed signal to states to call and ask them for this data when
ACF is working intensively with them to get TANF data through required
reporting system.   Technically, states' have until mid-June to submit data
for Jan-March quarter.
2. Highlighting case load declines gets riskier over time. While there is
no race to the bottom, she's concerned about strategies some states are
using that result in caseload reduction (she cited Idaho in particular) .
I think the jist of her concern is that we somehow endorse or encourage
these policies by applauding caseload reduction (high rate of sanctions is
a likely concern here) .
3. Understand the need for alternative data, and suggest national data
from CPS and AFDC records that show:
 a) Increase in percent of single mothers under 200% of poverty with kids
under 6 who are working -- rose from 44% in 96 to 50% in 97.
b) Increase in people who were on AFDC in prior year who are working in
following year -- rose from 25% in 96 to 30% in 97.
c) Increase in percent of AFDC recipients with earnings (9% in 96 to 12%
in 97. Note: this number remains surprisingly low nationally.    Some
individual states report much higher numbers) and amount of those earnings
(didn't have numbers with her) .

My response was:
1. Don't think this is too problematic.  States should have these caseload
numbers and since they know there are problems with the data many of them
have submitted, they shouldn't be too surprised or upset to get a call
asking for this info. Olivia wondered whether they could get cover from
NGA on this, i.e. have NGA let states know HHS would be calling for this
info and why. My feeling is ACF should let NGA and APWA know that they're
calling states to head off any organized 'revolt' but that I don't see any
formal role for the two organizations in getting this data--do you agree?
2. We understand caseload is not the only measure and that there are some
risks, but it's still an important measure and we're not ready to drop it,
especially given the absence of good alternatives.  I emphasized that both


the President and the Partnership are likely to emphasize that while great
things are happening, we still have challenges ahead--it wasn't our intent
to use the caseload numbers to declare victory and walk away, etc.---
message OK?
3. While these trends are all going in a positive direction, by themselves
these numbers don't look too impressive and will take a lot of
explaining. Once we have some of the other data such as participation
rates and high performance bonus info, we will be in a better position.
2&3. We welcome their suggestions for how to frame the caseload data in
light of these other trends, but we still expect to get and announce March
caseload numbers. I made no assurances about how the alternative data
would be used. OK?

Next steps:
1. Olivia will talk to Howard Rolston and Samara Weinstein (now acting as
ACF intergovernmental director) about getting calls out to states.
They'll think through how/whether to reach out to NGA (and APWA) for
help.   I suggested I'd be glad to put in a call to my former colleagues,
but I didn't think this was all that critical.
2. Howard or Samara will get back to me tomorrow, with the understanding
that we expect them to collect the March data. Olivia understands the
urgency of getting the data.
3. ACF will provide talking points on how they'd suggest framing case load
numbers and how to present/explain this other information.
4. ACF will provide talking points on status of TANF data collection.

Remember that we do also have December case load numbers that have not yet
been released as a fall back--although they don't hit the nice round 3M/SM
reductions that Bruce was looking for.

When I asked about the status of the TANF data, including participation
rates, Olivia said they'd provide a Q&A similar to what she has been
using. She focused mainly on the process of going back and forth with
states, said they're making progress, but is not ready to commit to a date
when this data will be ready, except to say its months rather than weeks.


