RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-MAY-1998 10:55:53.00

SUBJECT:   Education spending in tobacco

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I've given some addition thought to our education spending list after we
finished last night, and have an alternative that I think could work
better for us from a number of perspectives.  So, below I've provided two
options. Option 1 is what we agreed to last night, and can be used as
is. Here it is:

Option 1
1. Improving teaching through smaller classes and better teachers: States
can spend funds under this program to recruit, prepare, hire and provide
continued training and support in order to reduce class size and improve
teaching and learning to high state standards, and to improve the
processes and tools for carrying out these ends.   States would be required
to report each year on (1) the amount of funds used for this purpose each
year; (2) the reduction in class size achieved in the grade levels and
subject areas determined by the state   (3) the activities supported with
the funds; and, (4) student achievement, as measured on state assessments,
in the grade levels and subject areas described above.

2.   Safe and Drug Free Schools Program


Option 2 proposes a reading block grant instead of a class size/teaching
block grant, and includes technology teacher training as the second
program on the list. The reading block grant I've proposed essentially
merges our class size proposal (which was focused on improving reading in
the early grades) with our America Reads proposal and with the
Republican's version of a reading initiative that they are trying to
move.  Here is why I think this is a better approach:
From our point of view, it is better focused and better designed than the
class size block grant we discussed last night.  In order to make our
class size/teacher proposal more flexible and hopefully more acceptable,
we lost the originial key purposes and focus--class size to an average of
18 to improve reading in the early grades.
It incorporates our reading tutors as well as the Republican proposal for
improving reading by improving teacher training.  If we need to share
credit with R's in order to make this acceptable, this approach enables us
to do it more easily.
To deal with the Rep. pressure to not add new programs, we can argue that
this proposal would incorporate and therefore replace the separate reading


legislation that has passed the House and is being taken up by Jeffords.
In effect, they would not be creating any more new programs than they were
otherwise planning to create.  (Bob Shireman think that Gene would be ok
with this approach, since the odds of getting the reading bill we want out
of this congress by July 1 is pretty low.)
It's likely to be more palatable to the governors.   It gives the governors
a clear goal--to improve early reading--which is relatively widely shared,
and gives them flexibility in how to achieve it.   There are enough states
that are working to improve early reading with some combination of teacher
training, implementation of effective practices, reducing class size and
tutors so that we have a shot at having gov's see this as supporting
their own efforts.  Its not as good as a blank check from their point of
view, but it might be acceptable.


Option 2
Reading Block Grant: States would put together a comprehensive plan for
improving reading in the early grades.  States could spend funds under
this program to help students meet challenging standards in reading by the
4th grade, by any combination of (1) training teachers in proven,
effective reading instruction practices; (2) reducing class size in grades
k-4 by recruiting, preparing and hiring additional, well trained teachers;
(3) providing tutors or other forms of assistance for students who need
it, including in after-school or summer school programs; (4) implementing
proven reading programs; and (5) upgrading teacher certification
requirements.  The state would report annually (1) the amount of funds
used under this program and how the funds were used, (2) the extent of any
class size reductions it achieved under the plan, and (3) student
performance on state reading assessments tied to state standards in grade
3 or 4, as determined by the state.


