RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes!OU=OPD!O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE!TIME:13-MAY-1998 12:42:48.00

SUBJECT:     H1B visas -- update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
The following is an update of where we are on H1B legislation:

1.         Senate

The SAP that included a Secy of Labor recommended veto went up late on
Monday. We still do not know if the bill is going to the Senate floor
today. As of noon today, there was no time agreement.

Kennedy is planning to offer two amendments: (1) a recruit and retain
attestation (that looks good, though we have been told that he may offer
to exempt universities from this requirement); (2) a no lay-off
attestation (that is weak -- i.e., protects against lay-offs in a specific
job at a specific place of employment and defines "lay-off" to not include
the expiration of a grant, contract, or other agreement -- but the best
that Kennedy thinks he can get in the Senate).  Kennedy's whistle-blower
amendment (protection from retaliation) was accepted.

Abraham's bill authorizes $50 million for the SSIG program, but Reed is
offering an amendment to remove the SSIG program from the bill. Wellstone
is offering a training amendment that authorizes the Secy of Labor to
provide grants under part D of Title IV of the JTPA "for the purpose of
providing training and related activites to assist in preparing workers
for employment in industries with technology skills" to PICs (or their
successors, which could include Regional Skills Alliances).  He intends to
use the colloquy to speak about wanting an application fee to fund
training.

2.         House

The House Judiciary Committee mark-up has been postponed until next week
(Tues. or Wed.).   Peter now advises that our letter to Hyde should include
a statement that if the Committee significantly weakens the bill's
reforms, the Secy of Labor (and possibly the AG) would recommend a veto.
Before we make the final decision on this, we likely want to factor in to
our analysis the outcome of the Sen. vote (whether the Kennedy reforms
make it into the bill and whether a bill that includes those reforms would
be o.k. with us) .

That's it for now.

Julie


