RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-MAY-1998 19:12:47.00

SUBJECT:   Tues. statement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is currently being circulated for comment.


Draft 05/18/98 7:00pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS ON TOBACCO [AND HIGHWAY) LEGISLATION
THE WHITE HOUSE
May 19, 1998

        Good afternoon.   I have recently returned, as you know, from
Europe, where ,I worked to forge new economic ties with the other leading
industrial nations of the world.   It was a very productive trip.   It made
clear once again that America is indeed the indispensable nation.    In
Europe, as in the rest of the world, we are working to open markets while
maintaining the highest standards on labor and the environment.

        I have just met with my advisers to discuss ways to make this week
every bit as productive as the last one.  Congress goes on recess this
Friday. There is a lot of work to be done between now and then.   We
should not let a day pass without moving closer to accomplishing
it--without passing [a highway bill that safeguards our balanced budget
and our values, and) comprehensive tobacco legislation that protects
AmericaO,s children.

        This is what Americans want from us: they want both branches of
their government to put politics aside and come together on our most
pressing national concerns. They want us to maintain fiscal discipline
while investing in our people.  For five and a half years, this economic
strategy has been working--building the most competitive economy in the
world and the strongest in a generation. We are living in an American
economic renaissance.

        This is a moment of great opportunity in America, and great
bipartisan potential on Capitol Hill.   In the Senate, it is a week of
decision. We stand on the verge of one of the greatest public health
achievements in history--a historic triumph in our fight to protect
AmericaO,s children from the deadly threat of tobacco.   I have said I
would support any comprehensive, bipartisan bill that meets five
principles, and this legislation does so emphatically: it raises the price
of cigarettes and penalizes companies that sell to kids; it reaffirms the
FDAO,s authority to regulate tobacco products; it stops tobacco companies
from marketing to children; it further our other public health goals; and,
as I pledged in Kentucky, it protects tobacco farmers and their co
mmunities.



        The Senate Commerce Committee has passed, by an overwhelming
margin, a measure proposed by Senator McCain. My administration has
worked closely with them in recent weeks to address some concerns I had
about the legislation. Those concerns have been fully addressed.

        Senator McCainO,s bill represents AmericaO,s best chance to
protect our children from the scourge of teen smoking. The legislation is
tough.  It is fair.  I strongly support it, and Congress should pass it
without delay.  I would be proud to sign it.

        I want to comment on one other aspect of this bill--the provision
for liability.  I have always said that fair liability protection could be
part of an effective bill; and legislation like this stands a far better
chance of compensating victims of smoking-related diseases than years of
protracted--and possibly fruitless--litigation.  The liability provision
in the McCain bill is limited, it is fair, and it is essentially the same
as the provision in the Chafee-Graham-Harkin bill, which I had pledged to
support. Most important, it contains the incentives necessary to ensure
that tobacco companies stop marketing cigarettes to children.

        [Highway bill insert to come)

        This is a pivotal moment.  By weekO,s end, this Congress can build
a lasting legacy, a monumental achievement. The stakes, too, are
monumental--the stakes are AmericaO,s children.   Our efforts have never
been about the size of the prize we can extract from the tobacco
industry. They are about fulfilling our resp'onsibility to our
children--as parents, as a government, and as a nation. with hard work
and determination, we have traveled this far.   Congress, before it
adjourns, must take the next, crucial step--toward a healthier, stronger
America in the 21st century.


