RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-MAY-1998 17:33:06.00

SUBJECT:   INS reform -- update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
We had a meeting last week with Peter and folks from INS to discuss
legislative strategy.· Here is where we stand:

1.      Alan Erenbaum (INS) gave us a draft of the legislation.  Peter,
Leanne, Steve and I are looking it over.  It looks pretty general;
codifying the outline of our plan.  I will forward you a copy of the draft.

        There is one issue remaining: whether the legislation should
include a provision for inspectors to become equivalent (pay and benefits)
to other federal law enforcement officers. As you recall, OMB stated last
March that this would be very expensive and not possible to do in the
first wave of our reform efforts.  INS is insistent that this is a
necessary building block for the reform. Alan is going to let us know by
mid-week what their final position is on·this (if they have come up with
off-sets; whether they need "law enforcement" parity or could begin with
parity with Customs, etc.) We may need to pull a meeting together with
you, Doris and Michael to finalize how we will move forward.

2.      According to Abraham's staff, he wants to hold hearings starting
in mid to late June, with a second before the August recess and possibly a
third in September.  They would like to schedule one hearing each to
discuss services and enforcement. Abraham might introduce his legislation
sometime in September.

        Our plan is to have our legislation introduced (they are talking
to Watt and Kennedy) as soon as Congress returns from the Memorial Day
break -- prior to when Abraham will hold his first hearing.

3.      Doris is testifying at the House Judiciary Subcommittee on
Immigration on Thursday on INS reform.   Others testifying at the hearing
are: Harold Rogers; Susan Martin (CIR); Diana Aviv (Counsel of Jewish
Federation -- she will be supportive); Richard Gallo (from a Federal Law
Enforcement group) and Demitri Papademetriou (Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace -- also likely to be generally supportive ·of our
principles) .

Julie


