RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAY-1998 09:38:52.00

SUBJECT:     Lexington Front Page on Tobacco

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                  McConnell backs end to
                   tobacco support

                   Historic split puts Ford plan
                   in jeopardy

                   By Gail Gibson
                   HERALD-LEADER WASHINGTON
                   BUREAU

                   WASHINGTON -- Sen. Mitch McConnell
                   said yesterday he will back a plan to end the
                   60-year-old tobacco price-support program,
                   creating a historic split between Kentucky
                   senators over tobacco policy.

                 Then, in a related move, the Senate's Republican
leadership opened last
                 night's debate on sweeping anti-smoking legislation wi.th
a last-minute
                 procedural change putting that plan on equal footing with
Sen. Wendell
                 Ford's competing grower-protection proposal.

                   Seemingly caught by surprise, an angry Ford complained on
the Senate
                 floor that the move was unfair. In effect, it makes it
easier for Sen. Richard
                 Lugar to win Senate approval for his grower plan over For
d's, which would
                 keep the price-support program in place.

                   At a midday press conference, McConnell said he still
believes in the
                   tobacco program., which has kept prices for raw tobacco
high and small
                   farms active for generations.

                   But McConnell said the program is doomed in Washington,


so growers
                    should act now to secure an $8-per-pound buyout of their
tobacco
                    allotments, as proposed by Lugar, an Indiana Republican
and a devoted
                    free-trade proponent.

                 "I reluctantly see the tobacco program's end. It's not by
any means my first
                 choice," said McConnell, R-Louisville. "But it's a
recognition on my part of
                 the political reality that is all around us to observe,
for even the most casual
                 observer of this issue."

                    McConnell's decision marks the first time two Kentucky
senators,
                 regardless of party affiliation, have split on any key
tobacco policy issue.

                 "I think it's time to get the hound dogs out and see if
we can find the senator
                 who's supposed to be representing our tobacco farmers,"
Ford,
                 D-Owensboro, said yesterday afternoon. It was a reference
to
                 McConnell's first Senate race ih 1984, when he used hound
dogs in a
                 clever ad campaign to contend that incumbent Democrat
Walter D.
                 Huddleston was too often missing in action.

                 Lugar's    plan would pay farmers $8 per pound to buyout
their right to grow
                 tobacco    -- known as a "quota" -- while phasing out the
price-support
                 program    over three years. It would mean about $18 billion
for tobacco
                 farmers    and rural communities.

                    Ford's proposal, known as the LEAF Act, would give
farmers a buyout
                    option in as many as 10 payments, but would also keep in
place the
                 program's price and production controls. It would bring
about $28.5 billion
                 to farmers and rural communities.

                    McConnell had worked with Ford last summer to craft the
LEAF Act, and
                    was a co-sponsor when the bill was introduced last fall.
In recent months,
                    however, McConnell has repeatedly raised questions about
the
                    price-support program.' s future in a political environment
where tobacco "is
                    the darling of the attack set," as he put it yesterday.

                    "What will keep a candidate from a non-tobacco state from
voting against


                    tobacco,    if they know i t ' l l come back to haunt them in
November?" said
                    McConnell. He appeared at a press conference with Lugar
just hours
                    before debate began on the broad anti-smoking bill, which
appears
                    increasingly likely to win Senate approval.

                    The debate opened with Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott,
R-Miss.,
                    announcing the move that helped Lugar gain ground against
Ford's bill.
                    Going into the debate, Ford expected Lugar's plan would
have to be
                    offered as a separate amendment to the bill and garner 60
votes to beat his
                    own plan.

                    Now, the Lugar and Ford plans both are included in the
legislation. That
                    means the Senate will have to instead strike one plan out
-- and that takes
                    only 51 votes. Republicans outnumber Democrats in the Se
nate 55-45.

                    Protesting, Ford complained that the work he had done in
the Senate
                    Commerce Committee gaining a tactical advantage for his
plan was "out the
                    window." And his colleague, Sen. Ernest Hollings, D-S.C.,
sharply
                    declared:    "The bi-partisanship has ended."

                    Lott defended the decision, pointing out that Lugar is
chairman of the
                    Senate Agriculture Committee and noting that Senate rules
permitted the
                    move. "1 think this is a fair way to go," Lott said.

                    The debate will continue through this week on the bill,
which is bitterly
                    opposed by the nation's four largest tobacco companies.
Votes on the bill
                    could start today.

                    McConnell said he had not talked directly with Ford
before publicly
                    announcing his decision. He said Ford's devoted attention
to tobacco farm
                    issues made his decision to work with Lugar " doubly
difficult."

                    "This is not a personal thing," McConnell said. "We both
looked at the
                 same set of facts and reached a different conclusion
about what is best for
                 our growers."

                 In a statement, Ford said: "When I was growing up, my
parents instilled in


                     me two things: pay your debts and keep your word ... All
I can'tell our
                     farmers is I intend to keep my word."

                  For McConnell, his decision carries some political risk.
Every leading farm
                  group supports the LEAF Act. And amid the past year's
turbulent tobacco
                  discussions, Kentucky growers have repeatedly made plain
that their first
                  hope would be to keep the subsidy program.

                     Given the uncertainty over the future of the program,
many quota owners
                     have said they just want some guarantees that they will
get cash payments
                     to compensate them for losing their allotments.

                 Still, several Kentucky farm leaders who were in
Washington yesterday to
                 monitor the beginning of the tobacco debate were incensed
by McConnell's
                 decision.

                     "It's very, very bad news," said Rod Kuegel, president of
the
                     Lexington-based Burley Tobacco Growers Cooperative
Association.    "I
                     certainly regret this day ever happened, and I hope that
McConnell does,
                     too, eventually."

                 Danny McKinney, a Rockcastle County farmer who is
executive director of
                 the burley co-op, stood up in the middle of McConnell's
press conference
                 to denounce as "hogwash" any argument that growers care
more about a
                 buyout than about preserving the program.

                  "I'm really disappointed to hear this announcement today.
I'm really scared,
                 and my question to you is, 'What am I going to do, now?
What am I going
                 to raise that will bring my family the benefits that toba
cco has brought under
                 the program?' " McKinney asked McConnell. McConnell did
not directly
                 ,respond.

                     In Kentucky, Gov. Paul Patton and u.s. Rep. Scotty
Baesler, both
                     Democrats who support Ford's approach, were critical of
McConnell's
                decision. If the LEAF Act does not pass, Baesler said,
"this is McConnell's
                fault."

                     "He's abandoned the farmer when we need him," said
Baesler, who is


                   running to succeed Ford. "Right now is when we need a
united front."

                   But U.S. Rep. Ron Lewis, R-Cecilia, said McConnell is
"looking out for
                   the best interest of the family tobacco farmer."

                   "I have listened to hundreds of tobacco farmers in the
past months, and
                   there is growing and consistent support for a buyout,"
Lewis said.

                                               *
                   Herald-Leader staff writers Angie Muhs and Bill Estep
contributed to
                   this report.

                   All Contents


