 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:21-MAY-1998 16:47:16.00

 SUBJECT:       Your thoughts on which WtW Competitive Grants to Highlight

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ.: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 DOL has submitted 21 out of the 49 successful applicants for our
 consideration to highlight at 5/27 event. We're aiming for about 6 to
 serve as representative examples of the innovative strategies communities
 will implement with WtW funds.    I'll fax over DOL's matrix of 21, with my
 notes on it. My top choices are below (still missing a few pieces of info
 from DOL).   I've tried to hit balance of program/policy priorities for
 WtW--employment, retention and upward mobility, post-placement trainng,
 hard to serve, non-custodial, transportation, rural challenges.   IGA has
 also reviewed.   They are leaning towards: Detroit, Philadelphia (which I'm
 not entirely comfortable with from a policy perspective--very
 education-oriented, but may be hard to not include), Appalachia, something
 from LA, Chicago (but not essential), maybe Little Rock.   DOL will
 probably push hard for: Detroit, Boston, Philly, Appalachia, CHARO or LA
 CO. Need to identify our list of 6 this afternoon and then share with IGA
 and DOL--I imagine there'll be some negotiating. We can also invite a few
 local electeds even if we don't choose to highlight grants from their
 cities.   Invites need to go out ASAP.  Please note that these grantees
 will not be notified they've been selected until the 27th.

 LA County PIC
 1,625 participants.
 Assist long-term TANF recipients end dependency by increasing earnings of
 unemployed and underemployed non-custodial parents and thereby increasing
 child support.

 or

 Institute for Responsible Fatherhood
 OH, WI, NY, TN
 Non-custodial parents

Corporation for Ohio Appalachian Development
600 participants.
Extensive partnerships across multiple rural jurisdictions and services.
Comprehensive work first strategy including community work experience,
case management, asset building, transportation and child care, integrated
work and learning, job development, placement, and retention and
post-placement services

 City of Detroit Employment and Training Department --
 1700 participants. TANF recipients and non-custodial parents.
 Priority for EZ residents.
   ·
Comprehensive transitional program: wage subsidies, support services,
expanded remediation and vocational skills to facilitate upward mobility.
Complements formula funds which prepare people for work.  Focuses on rapid
placement and ongoing post-employment services.

NAPIC
2,226 participants.
Ten local partnership in collaboration with AACC.  Team of PIC, community
college and employers develop post-employment training.  Clients train
one-hour/day for ten weeks, at the work site.  Use interactive computer
technology.


CHARO Community Development, Los Angeles, CA
In conjunction with LA County and City PICs
653 participants: limited English speaking Hispanics
Place 501 participants into unsubsidized work at $7.00/hour
Bilingual job opportunities, job retention, career mobility
Industry clusters, including non-traditional: truck driving, construction,
customer services, retail, gardening,



Florida Development Disabilities Council
300 participants: welfare recipients with learning disabilities
Placement in entry-level jobs in tourism industry, with assessment, job
matching, job coaching, long term support and follow up-- up to 3 years of
"follow along" counselors to ensure job retention.

City of Chicago
Participants: ??
Serves city and surrounding counties.
Transportation focus: 1) van pool program coordinated with employers, 2)
fare subsidies to help people go to work, 3) training for state agency
staff and other agencies to education TANF clients on transportation
options.

or
Boston Metropolitan Area Planning Council
Participants: 2,090
Creates metro transportation program to complement formula grants
Concern: sounds a lot like what Access to Jobs would do.

PIC of Philadelphia
Participants:?? teen parents and noncustodial parents
Create upwardly mobile career paths with family sustaining wages.
Prepare and place people in targeted career paths, focusing on positions
with short-term skill training requirements, one year certificate
programs, and two -year degrees.
   .1


