RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUN-1998 14:56:02.00

SUBJECT:    Race Initiative -- policy ideas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN;Cathy R. Mays/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The following are a few kernals of ideas for Race Initiative policy
actions.  Please let me know if any of them seem interesting.  Thanks.

1.      Eliminate O&tracking08 in the Lower Grades
As a companion to our push for national standards and high expectations
for all children, we could advocate for the elimination of tracking or
D&ability groupingOB for students in grades K-3.   In many school systems,
young minority children are "tracked" into classrooms that offer less
challenging work and where less is expected of them, based on ability
tests or teacher evaluations. An end to this practice could both
effectively increase real educational opportunity for young minority
children (by not limiting their educational opportunities too soon) and
make an important statement about high expectations, high standards for
all children, and equal educational opportunity.   Part of this effort
could be to direct the Department of Education to develop guidelines for
schools that agree to "un-track."

2.         Civil Rights Enforcement -- Paired Testing
An executive order or directive asking the DOJ to coordinate paired
testing enforcement efforts across agencies (including Labor, Education,
HUD). This builds on the part of the PresidentD,s civil rights enforcement
package for FY99 that calls for Bill Lee.to coordinate civil rights
enforcement across agencies generally.  This executive order or directive
could ask both that they develop shared protocols in specific enforcement
areas and that they coordinate their efforts generally, through shared
information, etc.

3.       Racial Profiling
The Justice Department has initiated a review of the extent of the federal
governmentD,s use of racial profiling in law enforcement that will likely
result in some kind of policy recommendation. As you know, profiling not
only opens the door to race-based harassment (by legitimizing the notion
that minority status is a signal that someone is suspicious) but also
undermines the minority communities' confidence that they are being
treated equally to Whites, thus dampening our efforts to improve relations
between police departments and minority communities to further effective
law enforcement. We could ask the Department to expedite their review and
recommendation for completion prior to September 30th (the end of the
Initiative) .


