RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUN-1998 16:09:57.00

SUBJECT:    what do you make of the last graph?

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:

                     Lott Says Tobacco Bill in Trouble

                     Monday, June 1, 1998; 2:13 p.m. EDT

                     By LAURIE KELLMAN

                     Associated Press Writer

                     WASHINGTON (AP)   -- Sweeping tobacco legislation is on
the brink of
                     failure because some senators want to punish cigarette
companies by
                     raising the amount of money they would pay the
government, Senate
                     Majority Leader Trent Lott said Monday.

                  "The bill is teetering -- teetering in the balance here
-- as to whether or
                  not it's just going to collapse of its own weight,"
Lott, R-Miss., told
                  reporters Monday. " I mean, how much ·is enough? I mean,
greed has just
                  gone hog-wild here."

                     As Congress returns from its Memorial Day recess with
Sen. John
                  McCain's tobacco bill behind schedule, Lott told
reporters the measure's
                  survival is threatened by two amendments that toughen
the legislation's
                  terms for the tobacco companies and blow away the bill's
appeal to a
                  powerful centrist coalition of lawmakers.

                     One amendment, sponsored by Sens.' Judd Gregg, R-N.H.,
and Patrick
                     Leahy, D-Vt., would strip the bill of legal protection
for tobacco
                     companies and was approved by the Senate May 20. The
other,
                     sponsored by Sen. Richard Durbin, D-III., raise the
",
        ,.
     fines companies
                             would pay if youth smoking does not decline.

                             "If (Durbin's) amendment passes, that, coupled with the
     Gregg
                             amendment that passed, could be the death knell of the
     whole bill,"     Lott
                       said. "If those that want to keep enlarging this bill
     continue to do that,
                       then I think that the bill will sink of its own
     weight. ' ,

                             McCain's bill would cost tobacco companies at least $516
     billion over 25
                        years, raise the price of cigarettes $1.10 a pack over
     five years and allow
                        the Food and Drug Administration to regulate nicotine.

                             The calendar also becomes a bigger roadblock for the
     bill with each
                       passing day as its claim on the Senate's time is
     challenged by other
                       pressing matters. For example, the Senate will halt
     action on Wednesday
                       while lawmakers attend the Arizona funeral of former
     Sen. Barry
                       Goldwater.

                             Asked whether he might set the tobacco bill aside, Lott
     said he didn't
                             know. But he did sayan amendment by Sen. Phil Gramm,
     R-Texas, that
                             would abolish the so-called marriage tax penalty would
     "improve its,
                             chances. ' ,

                             Prospects sweeping tobacco legislation are even more
     bleak across
                       Capitol Hill, where House leaders are crafting a bill
     they believe carries a
                       lower financial and political price tag.

                       "It's an election year, and there's an II-seat majority
     in the House that's
                       always tenuous, " said retiring Rep. Bill Paxon, past
     chairman of the
                       National Republican Congressional Committee who may help
     organize
                       GOP campaigns this year. "We would de-energize our base
     with a bill
                       that raises hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes
     without giving some of
                       that money back. ' ,

                             "We may not like everything in it, but it strikes a
     balance that will
                             discourage kids from smoking, "   McCain said of his bill
     before Congress
                             recessed for Memorial Day. " I t is a compromise in the
     true sense.' ,
   "


                    Chafing senior House Republicans most are the McCain
bill's provisions
                  to expand the authority of the Food and Drug
Administration just a few
                  years after Republicans vowed to dismantle it.

                  They also object to the measure's plan to generate
billions of dollars for
                  the government by raising taxes on cigarettes $1.10 a
pack.

                  House leaders are considering a billion-dollar
anti-smoking advertising
                  campaign funded with money tobacco companies otherwise
would deduct
                  from their taxes. Also being considered are plans to
charge companies
                  roughly $200 billion to settle lawsuits filed against
the industry by three
                  dozen states, according to numerous Republican sources.


