RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN;Jordan Tamagni/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-l998 07:36:00.00

SUBJECT:   Revised

TO: Laura Emmett
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Eleanor S. Parker ( CN;Eleanor S. Parker/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO']     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN;Ann F. Lewis/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 6/2/98 8:30pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR CITY YEAR CONVENTION
CLEVELAND, OHIO
June 3, 1998

        Hello, City Year, and thank you for inviting me to be a part of
this Convention of Idealism.  I want to thank Leslie Frye for your
introduction and for reading your letter, and I also thank the 600 other
City Year Members who wrote me with your own stories of service.   I hope
you wonO,t mind that instead of writing back, I decided to thank you in
person!  I also want to thank City Year members Stephen SpaloBs and
Marilyn Concepcion -- itO,s good to see both of you again.  I still have
that sweat shirt you gave me, Stephen!   [Other Acknowledgments: Sen.
Harris Wofford, Eli Segal, Alan Khazei & Michael Brown, founders, City
Year; Casey Hunt, City Year member.]

        We are living in a very exciting time, when our country and our Congress
face many challenges to strengthen our nation for the 2lst Century.   I
believe that citizen service is one of the most important ways we can meet
many of those challenges.  But before I speak about service, I want to
talk to you about an issue before the Congress right now that affects
young people most of all: the tobacco bill.

        Smoking kills more people every year than AIDS, alcohol, car
accidents, murders, suicides, drugs and fires combined -- and 90% of all
smokers started smoking before they turned 18.  The big tobacco companies
know this, and for years theyO,ve spent hundreds of millions of dollars on
ads to get you to smoke.  Their strategy has worked: 3,000 young people
start smoking every day ... and l,OOO will die early as a result.

        This week, the Senate has the opportunity to pass a strong tobacco
bill that will help us keep young people from lighting their first
cigarettes.   This bill is supported by people in both parties, by public
health officials, by parents and by young people themselves.



        There are some in the Congress who would do anything to stall,
stop, or kill this bill -- but we canD,t let that happen. We will never
have a better chance to save one million lives.  So I urge the Senate to
put the national interest above narrow interests, and do nothing else
until it passes this bill.

        And now, I want to talk about another way that we can strengthen our
nation for the 21st Century, by helping all Americans to do as you have
done: rise to the call of citizen service.

         When I first ran for President, I said that I wanted to buil~
D&an America where service is a way of life ... where each of us reaches
our fullness as human beings by being of serviceD8 to our fellow
Americans. And people like you were my inspiration.   In 1991, I visited
City Year in Boston, and I saw idealism in action.  I vowed to build a
national service program that gives more Americans the chance to serve,
and more young people the opportunity to go to college.

         Six years later, we have corne a long way to realizing that
vision. One of my proudest moments as President carne when I signed into
law the bill tha't created AmeriCorps.   Since then, AmeriCorps has helped
nearly 90,000 young people to serve their communities -- and helped
nearly 50,000 young people with college costs. And this year, more than
40, 000 AmeriCorps position are being filled all around the count·ry. And
every you.ng person who joins AmeriCorps typically recruits 12 more
volunteers.

        Because of AmeriCorps, the Senior Corps, which gives older Americans the
chance to serve, and Learn and Serve America, which helps tap millions of
studentsD, potential for service, more communities are able to rebuild
after floods and tornadoes ... more elderly Americans have the horne
services they need ... more children are being vaccinated against disease
... more young people have mentors to help them stay out of gangs and in
school     and more students are learning to read.

        In fact, our America Reads program, which relies on all of our national
service programs for tutors, is helping thousands of children to learn to
read.   Last year, I was pleased that many of our nationD,s college and
university presidents carne forward and committed work study students to
serve as reading tutors.   I am pleased to announce that as of today,. 1,000
colleges and universities around the country have joined our efforts.

        AmeriCorps works because it puts idealistic and enthusiastic young
people like you where the problems are.  It doesnD, t di.ctate from
Washington where AmeriCorps members should serve and what they should do.
It lets states and local communities identify their own needs, and design
their own programs. And it enables service organizations like Boys and
Girls Club of America, Habitat For Humanity, and hundreds of other
non-profit and faith-based programs to select and use AmeriCorps members
to continue and enlarge the good work they are already doing.

        Here in Cleveland, more than 200 citizens of all ages and backgrounds are
serving
in 14 AmeriCorps programs -- including AmeriCorps members serving with
City Year Cleveland -- doing everything from tutoring children to building
homes, from organizing neighborhood watch groups to cleaning streams.

        AmeriCorps is bringing volunteers to communities in need -- and it
is bringing people together. While we have made great strides in the last


50 years, too often in America, people of different racial, ethnic, and
economic backgrounds live, work, and go to school in different
communities.   I launched the Race Initiative to help bridge those gaps.
And I believe that service -- working together toward common goals -- can
unite us as few other things can.

        City Year and AmeriCorps are living proof of that.  Beyond the
thousands of kids you have tutored, the thousands of rooms you have
painted, the thousands of trees you have planted ... beyond the elderly
people you have cared for, the people with AIDS you have comforted, the
young people you have given encouragement and hope to, beyond all this,
your year of service has taught you and reminded us that we really are in
this together; we really can be one America.

        In community after community, people are coming together through citizen
service to meet our most vital needs.  Now we in government must come
together to create more opportunities for Americans to serve. Today, I
call on the Congress to extend national service into the next millennium
by reauthorizing AmeriCorps, the Corporation for National Service, and our
other service programs.

        There is no better evidence of how national service can unite
people and political p'arties than the PresidentsO, Service Summit, which I
was pleased to convene last year with Presidents Ford, Carter, and Bush,
as well as Nancy Reagan and General Colin Powell.    I think everyone who
was with us in Philadelphia felt a renewed sense of excitement about
citizen service, and how we can mobilize the nation's huge community
service network and volunteers to give our nation's youth the five key
resources they need to succeed:   a caring adult, a safe space, a healthy
start, an effective education, and a chance to give back.

        Since the Summit, our administration has worked to make this goal
a reality through programs like the new Child Health Insurance Program,
our child care initiative, and the High Hopes Mentoring program. At the
same time, America's Promise, under the leadership of General Colin
Powell, has been encouraging corporations, non-profits, and other
organizations to meet and increase the commitments they made at the Summit.

        But there is more that we can do.  Today, I am pleased to announce that
the Corporation for National Service will create up to 1,000 new
AmeriCorps positions, targeted to pursue the goals of the Presidents
Summit. These new positions will add firepower to state and local efforts
to ensure that all young people have the resources they need to reach
their highest potential.

        In all these ways, we are helping to bring about a new sense of idealism,
a renewed spirit of citizenship, and a new season of service in America.
I know I donO, t have to tell you that Amer.iCorps members make a pledge
when they are sworn in.   I wish all Americans could take this pledge and
make service a part of their lives.   IO,d like to ask all of you here to
take that pledge again with me today:

        0&1 will get things done for America, to make our people safer, smarter,
and healthier.   I will bring Americans together to strengthen our
communities.   Faced with apathy, I will take action. Faced with conflict,
I will seek common ground. Faced with adversity, I will persevere. I will
carry this commitment with me, this year and beyond.   I am an AmeriCorps
member ... and I am going to get things done.OB

        IO,ve heard that City Year members like to tell the story of the
  '.
little girl who tried to save a some starfish washed up on the beach,
knowing that she couldnD,t save them all, but still trying to make a
difference for a few.  That reminds me of something that Robert Kennedy
once said:  D&Few [of us] will have the greatness to bend history itself;
but each of us can work to change a small portion of events, and in the
total all those acts will be written the history of this generation.

        Like the young people of my generation, the young people of your
generation are idealistic and full of ideas; you are passionate and
compassionate; above all, you 'are committed to action.  And I truly
believe that together, through citizen service, you will do more than
write the history of your generation.  Together, you are already writing
the history of our nation in the 21st Century.   I admire you and thank
each of you for everything you are doing.


