RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1998 14:17:17.00

SUBJECT:     Problem with the Treasury anti-smuggling floor

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN;Cynthia Dailard/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Josh is not wild about the idea of a floor for Treasury anti-smuggling
activities. He argues that we should make sure that the appropriators (as
well as the Commerce Committee) are alright with this before we go ahead.
He's amazed that the appropriators are on board now,  but worries that
more restrictions will change that.  He also argues that ATF is not as
hated as FDA on the Hill (Congress doesn't propose to zero them out, just
flat line them) and that Treasury is well taken care of in the current str
ucture (being one of four enforcement agencies dividing up a given pot of
money, with the capacity to levy fees that the appropriators won't be able
to spend on anything else.)   He suggests we push back hard on Leahy to
restore only the FDA floor, and, if he won't do so without adding more
floors, arrange to go to discuss the issue with the appropriators.

Given this, I'm not quite sure how to proceed.  I'm tempted to tell
Treasury that we're fine with it, but OMB is objecting. Of course, I do
now have in hand the spending info Leahy would need.  Or we could proceed
as Josh suggests. What kind of stinks here is that the original FDA floor
came from Rich's somewhat outside the OMB process conversations with
Jeffords and others, and now Treasury is trying to play by the rules and
is getting the run around.

Here's the spending OMB and Treasury staff are close to agreeing would be
needed for ATF and Customs anti-.smuggling efforts -- total is $327 million
over 5 (out of $2.9 billion, $1.2 billion of which is earmarked for FDA).

(in millions)
                  FY 99   FY 00    FY 01      FY 02   FY 03
ATF               45      38       53         69      73
customs 11        8       10       10         10

Total Treasury    56      46       63         79      83

ATF would hire about 160 inspectors, agents, and analysits, ramping up to
450 positions over five years to implement a regulatory and enforcement
regime for the tobacco distribution chain, including licensing, verifying
licensee qualifications, conducting audits, and undertaking investigations
concerning diversion of tobacco products.

Customs would hire about 120 inspectors and import analysts to conduct
enforcement at the border and trend analysis, in addition to purchasing
some detection technology for placement at ports of entry.


