RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1998 15:52:30.00

SUBJECT:   Riggs bilingual bill

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Our diehard bilingual team met today to figure out how we want to approach
tomorrow's full committee mark-up of Riggs, in the wake of the roughly
60-40 vote in favor of Unz. Here's where we carne out:

1. We should strongly oppose Riggs at mark-up, and Riley's letter should
(1) highlight what's wrong with Riggs; (2) reiterate our view of the right
way to reform bilingual, including our 3-year goal; (3) state our
intention to send up a bill consistent with these principles as part of
reauthorization of elementary and secondary programs (leaving the unstated
impression this would be in the next Congress, but neither commiting to a
specific timetable .or precluding sending up a bill this session of we
decided we need to.

The committee Dems are still solidly opposed to Riggs.   They are neither
looking for a veto threat nor alternative legislation from us at this
point, though some have indicated that they will probably want an
alternative on the floor.   We think more Dems will corne to that
conclusion as this moves forward, and as the full impact of the Unz vote
sinks in.  Indicating in our statement that we will have an alternative
may lead Dems forward on this--without blowing up a united Dem. front at
mark-up--and will provide us time to consult with Boxer and other Cal.
Dems, the leadership, and the Hispanic Caucus.

2.  The leg affairs folks here and at ED are notifying Becerra, Hispanic
members on the committee, and other key committee members of our plan so
they are not surprised,

3.  The Education Department will continue to work on legislation
reflecting our principles; they've been told to move quickly on this, and
be ready to send up an alternative on short notice.

4.  We should reassess our stance as the bill moves to the floor, and
every other step of the way. We continue to think that we should
entertain a veto threat only if it is tied to support from the Hispanic
Caucus to a bill reflecting our principles.

We do not think the Senate is likely to take up this bill, though we do
think that Riggs could try to force this onto the appropriations bill.
perhaps with the expectation that we will negotiate changes and
incorporate some bilingual reform bill into the final package. We'll deal
with this if and when we get there.


