RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-JUN-1998 20:20:26.00

SUBJECT:   Bilingual education/Riggs update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Riggs passed at full committee level today, with no amendments, on a
straight party line vote

The Education Department, as directed, is completing drafting on
legislation that fully incorporates our principles.  This will be a set of
amendments to the existing bilingual education legislation.   I expect to
see a draft of this late Friday or early Monday.  We will meet the
President's requirement of having a bill completed next week.

Congressman Becerra has indicated that the Caucus is open to an
alternative to Riggs "if it is needed", and that they want to be part of
the process of crafting an alternative.  There was a meeting of members of
the Hispanic Caucus and New Dems today, in which they agreed that (1) they
wanted to make sure Dems stayed united on bilingual ed; (2) they would
work together to craft an alternative if they determined one was needed;
(3) they didn't know yet if they needed one, didn't think Riggs would come
to the floor in the near future, and so felt no sense of urgency to figure
out whether an alternative is needed.

As I see it, our key challenge is to make sure that the announcement of
our proposal is timed so that it meets a receptive rather than-hostile
Democratic response.  I think that the Dems will ultimately want a-n
alternative before Riggs goes to the floor.  However, at present, I think
POTUS is probably on a faster track than either the CHC or the rest of the
Dems.  It remains to be seen how far and fast we can move the CHC and
others next week.  It is very clear that the advocacy groups are still
firmly opposed to any alternative legislation, and will push the CHC very
hard to remain opposed as well--regardless of what either POTUS or the
Dem. Caucus need.

One big danger here is that the CHC thinks ~e are charging out with an
alternative despite their wishes and without a cleal legislative need,
digs in their heals in opposition to our bill and brings the Black Caucus
and others with them--and we have created a bad vote on our bill that
parallels the testing vote.

The other big danger is that we leave the President looking like (and
believing) he is sitting on the sidelines while the nation and the
Congress debates the future of bilingual education, because he caved to
pressure from the advocacy community..

I'll be working tomorrow to figure out a consultation/outreach strategy
that can help advance our case, and preferably not blow up on us.  If your
schedule permits, I'd love your advice and counsel.


