RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-JUN-1998 10:55:01.00

SUBJECT:   IS THIS WHAT YOU HAVE IN MIND?

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 06/05/98
10:55 AM ---------------------------




Jordan Tamagni
06/05/98 10:45:54 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         IS THIS WHAT YOU HAVE IN MIND?

Draft 6/5/98 10:00am

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON TOBACCO BILL
June ·6, 1998


        Good morning.   We are living in a very exciting time, when our
country and our Congress face many challenges to strengthen our nation for
the 21st Century.   Today, I want to talk to you about the most important
issue before the Congress right now -- and one that affects our children
most of all: the tobacco bill.

        Over the past five and a half years, our nation has confounded the
conventional wisdom and broken through political paralysis to address
many of our most difficult challenges. We turned a deficit, projected to
be $290 billion when I took office, into a balanced budget 0) and now we
are working to reserve the surplus until we save Social Security. We
ended decades of rising welfare dependency 0) and now we have the lowest
percentage of people on welfare in three decades. We stopped the
seemingly inexorable rise in lawlessness, and now crime is down for [six]
years in a row. The American people did this by demanding that our
leaders put aside partisan differences, focus on the national interest
over narrow interests, and above all, come together in common sense and
act.

        Today, we have a rare and fleeting opportunity to take such
bipartisan, historic action on the greatest single public health threat we
face: the deadly addiction of tobacco.  The statistics are well known to
us now, but they have not lost their power to shock: Smoking kills more
people every year than AIDS, alcohol, car accidents, murders, suicides,
drugs and fires combined. Ninety percent of all smokers lit their first
cigarettes before they turned 18. Every day, 3,000 more young people will
start smoking -- and 1,000 of them will die early as a result.



        Now, thanks to groundbreaking steps taken by my administration,
the courage of parents and the public health community, the determination
of public officials at every level, and committed and courageous
bipartisan leadership on Capitol Hill, America is ready to break through
gridlock once again.  We can make 1998 the year when we enact
comprehensive, effective legislation that puts tobacco out of the reach of
our children forever.

        This is the critical moment of truth for Congress.  Senators John
McCain and Fritz Hollings have brought to the floor a landmark proposal to
protect our children from tobacco.  This bill raises the price of
cigarettes if tobacco companies do not show clear progress in reducing
teen smoking; it ends the manipulative marketing campaigns that seek to
lure children to smoke; it would be the most significant protection for
the public health and safety in many years. And this legislation also
protects tobacco farmers and their families etc.

        There is a broad consensus for this bill. It is reasonable; it is
bipartisan; it is in the interest of our children.  But for weeks now, the
Senate has not acted, as a small band has done everything it could to
avoid angering big tobacco by avoiding a vote.  Today, I say to them: The
debate has gone on for long enough.  You are standing in the way of saving
one million lives. And the American people will not stand for it.

        The Senate should do nothing else until it passes tobacco
legislation.  It is time to put aside narrow interests for the national
interest, and come together for the good of our children.

       Thanks for listening.


