RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Rebecca M. Blank ( CN=Rebecca M. Blank/OU=CEA/O=EOP [ CEA]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1998 17:08:01.00

SUBJECT:   Options paper

TO: pruggles ( pruggles @ osaspe.dhhs.gov @ inet   [ UNKNOWN]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Katherine K. Wallman ( CN=Katherine K. Wallman/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joseph J. Minarik ( CN=Joseph J. Minarik/OU=OMB/O=EOP. @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Paul Bugg ( CN=Paul Bugg/OU=OMB/Q=EOP @ EOP [ OMB]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Richard B. Bavier ( CN=Richard B. Bavier/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mark A. Wasserman ( CN=Mark A. Wasserman/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the final options paper for the Principal's meeting on poverty
measurement. Sally Katzen's office will be scheduling this meeting in the
near future. Note that the Appendix on program effects has been
substantially edited, after extended negotiation between OMB and HHS.   ============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D24]MAIL45527395X.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CDOD0000010A020100000002050000008EC10000000200002926BB8FD9F0033FE4D58B
4E65CB23365F5C157103FC1E3DCB2CB62C609D40DEA4E2E423F9FD5F264279D867FC04029C67E3
CF67247EB46E8BODEDA5F47C962FA1496CE461A8A1299B237BC218C523627F38293BD99FA5CA94
C7FF51900AB1B807009331CF5091BCD43CC16004AD3475EB85C2CF53D2F906C562A49A69E965AA
CBB509A36D1785F535BD48EE1360F35ABBEF1C9C2D2D1DOF1A101523D4AF19E4174F65D1FB813B
99741CDOCE1C7COB6829CC808FD8F27E8E6DF545D763C35BEFEF9D19DE84077D19E9D5BECDAE5D
F6F3495F24A7674BF32E2ABD57FD53C1280FBD33F853AC13485F1A5986BE778D73D30463AC01F2
B6AFD6659A342CAABDBAF505607EF088DF6AFC965D6F9AA3B1E5655616621833983B2628B78741
A50DE7154FE1930DB2D4462A016EBB8E1C08BCFCFE33999DE312ABCFB731B77AFB909605D2BFF5
A23182A7D2DDC7790B6A2FE61823016C5B2F7851B22E0702D3DE0197BA1C7EB14AOB3F9AD1CDBA
96A78DBA3929C90FD5F6449FA2BDCC24361965EF82EOF389BBC31988EA5DBB3F325A292A50B99F


                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                             .                               CLOSE HOLD. Page 1

June 8, 1998

DRAFT BACKGROUND MEMORANDUM FOR EOP PRINCIPAL'S MEETING

FROM:          REBECCA BLANK
               ELENA KAGAN
               SALLY KATZEN
               JOE MINARIK

Subject:       Meeting on Income and Poverty Measures

Purpose of the Meeting

In early 1999, the Census Bureau will publish alternative measures of poverty based on the
proposals contained in the 1995 National Research Council (NRC) report, Measuring Poverty: A
New Approach. The current official poverty measure dates back to the 1960s, and while it has
been an important contributor to public debate and policymaking, the NRC report reflects a broad
consensus that the measure is out-of-date and in need of revision.

Poverty measurement involves two concepts: (1) A definition of family income; and (2) A
"threshold" against which income is compared to determine if a family is poor. Changes in
these two concepts will have a direct impact on statistics used by the public for informational
purposes. Changes will also likely have an effect on Federal programs as well.

Because of the importance of an independent statistical system, the Census Bureau plays the
major role in deciding technical issues regarding poverty measurement. However, because of
the important policy and political implications of the poverty concept, Census has asked for
advice from the EOP (because OMB, through OIRA's Statistical Policy Office, is the statutory
arbiter of the "official" poverty measurement methodology) on the upcoming report.

In response to Census' request, CEA, DPC, NEC, and OMB formed a policy working group.
(Among the agencies, only the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Services Policy at HHS
was invited to participate because of her expertise on poverty measurement.) This working
group has held a series of meetings, and prepared the attached memo to outline its tentative
guidance to Census. The meeting of EOP Principals is intended to review the working group's
conclusions before they are transmitted to Census. It is important to emphasize that we are only
being asked to give advice to the Bureau of the Census; what it actually publishes is its decision.

There are four global issues to be decided; the first two are most pressing because we need to
give guidance to Commerce as soon as possible:

1) Should the Census Bureau select or highlight a single alternative poverty measure, or present
several equally in its forthcoming report? Do the principals have a single preferred measure that
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                 CLOSE HOLD. Page 2

    they would like to see replace the current official measure? Would anointing a single measure at
    this time be premature, and prejudge the analytical process? Would it raise ire in the Congress?
    If we do not anoint a single preferred measure at this time, will it be difficult to select one later
    should we want to switch the "official" definition to one of the proposed alternatives?

    2) There are also two technical issues (policy options 1 and 4 in the background memo) that
    require careful consideration.

          ShQuld we advise Census to benchmark the new poverty measure to the old poverty rate
           in the current year (so that the number of people classified as poor would remain the
           same, although the distribution would change)? Should Census implement the NRC
           recommendations, which would result in a higher poverty rate (e.g., 18% rather than
           13.7% in 1996)?

          If there is only one measure reported by Census, should it account for differences in
           medical out-of-pocket (MOOP) expenditures among households in the way recommended
           by the NRC, namely, subtracting them from income before a family's poverty status is
           calculated? (An alternative choice is to add them to the thresholds -- which ofthese
           methodologies should be used is a technical choice best left to Census.) Ifwe believe
           that several measures should be equally reported by Census, should one of them account
           for medical expenditures using a different methodology?

    3) How should the Administration proceed toward a new official measure of poverty? Should it
    proceed along a timetable to replace the current official measure before the end of this
    Administration? If so, what process do we need to establish to move forward on this in a timely
    fashion? Or, should the Administration proceed more cautiously, letting a consensus build
    around a preferred measure among the community of users of poverty statistics, but possibly
    lessening the chances that the official measure is ultimately changed?

    4) In addition to OMB's designation of the "official" poverty measurement, HHS also issues
    administrative poverty guidelines, used in certain program eligibility calculations. Ifrevised
    poverty thresholds are adopted as part of a new poverty measure, wOl.lld the Administration
    continue the old administrative poverty guidelines, or make them consistent with the new
    threshold measure? If the guidelines are made consistent, would the Administration make
    programmatic changes to mitigate the effects on eligibility and spending of switching to the new
    guidelines?




\
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             CLOSE HOLD. Page 3

       TECHNICAL BACKGROUND ON INCOME AND POVERTY MEASURES


The Current Poverty Measure

The methodology by which current poverty thresholds are determined was developed in the early
1960s by Mollie Orshansky, a staff economist at the Social Security Administration. She
developed a set of poverty thresholds that vary with the number of adults, the number of children,
and the age of the family head. These thresholds represent the cost of a minimum diet
multiplied by 3 to allow for non-food expenditures. The multiplier of 3 was chosen because the
average family in 1955 spent one-third of its after-tax income on food. Since the late 1960s, the
thresholds have simply been updated annually to adjust for price inflation -- i.e., the measure of
poverty has remained virtually unchanged for 35 years, despite substantial changes in family
behavior and govemment policy.

The NRC panel identified several weaknesses in the current poverty measure:

      The current poverty measure takes no account of changes in taxes (i.e., the expansion of
       the EITC) or in-kind benefits (i.e., Food Stamps).

      The current measure does not distinguish between the needs of working and non-working
       families. In particular, it does not reflect the cost of child care and other work expenses
       for working low-income families .


             .
       The current poverty measure takes no explicit account of medical care costs, which vary
       significantly across families and have increased substantially since the current poverty
       measure was developed.

,The NRC Recommendations

In order to understand the NRC panel's recommended revisions, one must understand the basics
of determining poverty. A family is considered poor when its resources. fall below a
predetermined poverty line or threshold. Therefore, one must develop a methodology for
estimating family resources and for defining the threshold resource level below which a family is
considered poor.

1.     Defining Family Resources

Under the current poverty calculation, the definition of family resources is cash income. The
NRC recommendations would estimate family resources as:

Family resources             Cash income + Near-money in-kind benefits - Taxes - Child care
                             costs - Work expenses - Child support payments - Out of pocket
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion       m
                                                                            CLOSE HOLD. Page 4

                               medical care expenditures (including health insurance premiums)

The rationale for subtracting taxes, work and medical expenses from family resources is that
these expenditures are typically not discretionary and reduce the family income available to
achieve a basic quality of life.

There is near consensus among researchers that adjusting for near-money in-kind benefits
(primarily Food Stamps and housing subsidies) and taxes would be an improvement in how
poverty is measured. There is slightly less agreement on whether child care costs, work
expenses, and child support payments should also be deducted because an unknown proportion
of these expenses is likely discretionary. (The NRC proposes to cap the amount of child care
and work expenses that can be subtracted to deal with this problem.) As discussed below, the
adjustment for out-of-pocket medical care expenditures is more controversial.

2.     Defining a Poverty Threshold

A threshold must be determined against which to compare a family's resources. The NRC panel
 recommends basing the threshold on expenditures on "necessities" (food, shelter, and clothing)
plus a little more. Specifically, the NRC panel recommends selecting the 30th to 35th percentile
in the distribution of annual expenditures on food, shelter, and clothing among families of four
(two adults and two children), and then multiplying this expenditure level by between 1.15 and
1.25. Thresholds for other family sizes and types would be determined by an equivalency scale
calculation.

The NRC recommends adjusting these thresholds to take into account geographic variation in
cost ofliving, based on differences in housing costs by region and by city-size. It also
recommends adjusting the thresholds over time by recalculating them from expenditure data on
an annual basis.


                                 OPTIONS FOR DISCUSSION

1. Recommendation regarding determining the level of the poverty threshold.

The NRC panel acknowledges that the actual level at which the poverty threshold is set (and
hence the final poverty rate) is inherently arbitrary and cannot be determined on the basis of
purely statistical judgements. There are two primary options:

 A. The NRC alternative. As described above, the NRC panel recommends establishing a
 threshold based on the 30th-35th percentile in the distribution of annual expenditures for a family
 of four, with a small multiplier to account for additional small personal expenditures. As shown
 in Tables 1 and 2, column 3, this would raise the 1996 poverty rate from 13.7% to 18%, and
increase poverty among all subgroups. In addition, (as described further in Option B) this
                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                         CLOSE HOLD. Page 5

change will alter the composition of poverty among various subgroups.)

B. Benchmarking. The NRC panel also considered poverty estimates that benchmark the
alternative poverty rate to equal the old poverty rate in a given year. The Census has done a
number of such benchmarked calculations for 1996, as shown in Tables 1 and 2, column 2.
(The report issued early next year would benchmark to 1997.) Benchmarking would assure that
the aggregate poverty rate is identical for the official and the alternative measure in the
benchmark year. But the distribution of poverty among subgroups within each measure would
differ (see Table 2). In general, working families and families with large out-of-pocket medical
expenses become poorer and non-working families with substantial in-kind benefits become less
poor. This has geographic as well as subgroup poverty rate implications. Similarly, both
historical and future trends would differ. For instance, the alternative measure is identical in
1996 but higher in 1991. (The faster fall using the alternative measure is largely due to the
expansion in the EITC.)

Pros of using the NRC measure:
      Incorporates the recommendations of the NRC panel, based on their professional
      judgement from the best available evidence.

      Generates dollar threshold levels that are quite similar to the current dollar thresholds
       (although the resources to which the thresholds would be compared are quite different).

Cons of using the NRC Measure:
     Results in a higher poverty rate (although the trends over time are similar.)


Pros of Benchmarking:
      May provide an easier transition to the new methodology because there will not be a
       change in the overall level of poverty.

      Focuses the arguments on the relative distribution of who is poor rather than how many
       people are poor.

Cons of Benchmarking:
     Violates the NRC recommendation that the threshold should be based on the 30th-35th
      percentile in the expenditure distribution. In order to benchmark, the threshold falls to
      (about) the 25th percentile of expenditures on food, shelter, and clothing.


2. Recommendation regarding updating the thresholds over time

Currently1:he poverty threshold is updated annually using the cpr. This, however, does not
allow for adjustments that reflect changes in underlying consumption patterns that might affect
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                              CLOSE HOLD. Page 6

the revised thresholds. For instance, food prices have decreased relative to other goods over
time, while housing prices have increased. There are two options:

(A) Recalculate the thresholds annually as a share of consumption on food, shelter, and clothing.
(This is recommended by the NRC panel.)

(B) Update the thresholds on a year-to-year basis using a price index (preferably one based only
on food, shelter and clothing). Implement a regular process (every 5-10 years) of reviewing the
poverty measure and recalculating the thresholds.

Pros ofRe-calculating the Thresholds:
      Regular recalculation will allow the poverty thresholds to reflect more accurately changes
       in consumption patterns and standards ofliving.

      Without an expectation that the thresholds will be re-calculated regularly, it may be hard
       to update them at all.

      Under certain data circumstances, recalculation could move the threshold a large amount
       or in an unexpected direction. This might raise substantive and political concerns.


Pros of Updating Using the CPI:
      Using the NRC methodology, the poverty thresholds are somewhat relative (i.e., they are
       affected by changes in the distribution of household expenditures.) As a result, they are
       a moving target and do not provide an absolute standard of need. A CPI adjustment
       would make it easier to compare poverty from year-to-year against a constant standard.

      Because consumption patterns and standards ofliving change slowly, it may be better to
       take them into account periodically rather than annually.

      An update with a CPI for necessities only (food, clothing, and shelter) may capture most
       of the relevant changes and would make it easier in the short run to understand the
       updating procedure.

      The data may not be good enough for an annual re-calculation of the thresholds.


NOTE: The EOP Policy Working Group recommends Option (B).


3. Recommendation as to whether thresholds should be adjusted for geographic variation.

The NRC panel recommended adjusting the poverty thresholds for cost-of-living differences
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             CLOSE HOLD. Page 7

across regions and by city size. Census proposes to make such adjustments based on housing
cost differences (which have much greater regional/city size variation than food or clothing.)

Pros ofAdjustingfor Geographic Variation in Cost ofLiving:
      Most statisticians and economists agree that such adjustments should be made if data are
       available.

Cons ofAdjusting for Geographic Variation in Cost ofLiving:                                          ,
     There is no one "right" way to make such adjustments and the issue could be highly
      politicized.

        The data available to make such adjustments are limited and may not be entirely reliable.

        Implementing such an adjustment in the poverty line threshold could lead to pressure to
         provide regional cost adjustments in a wide variety of other government programs, from
         Social Security benefits to tax payments.


NOTE: The EOP Policy Working Group recommends against geographic price adjustments.


    4_ Recommendation regarding how to account for medical care expenditures.

Since the mid-1970s, analysts have been concerned that the official poverty rate overstates the
extent of poverty among beneficiaries of Medicare, Medicaid, and private health insurance. At
the same time, the official poverty rate may understate the extent of poverty among populations
with large medical expenditures. Most analysts agree that, in principle, medical care "needs"
should be incorporated into the calculations ofthe threshold and family resources (i.e., families
with higher medical needs should have higher thresholds; those with more generous medical
benefits should be considered to have more resources; and those who must spend more to
achieve "good health" should have those expenses subtracted from their resources). However
we cannot observe a family'S medical need. In addition, it is not clear that one can simply
impute the cash value of insurance benefits and add this to income. The "extra" benefits received
from insurance to cover expensive medical services do not provide income that can be used for
any other purpose.

To understand the difficulties, consider including medical benefits into the income calculations.
Adding medical benefits to income, without also adjusting the poverty threshold, has the perverse
effect of making sicker individuals appear better off. Other proposals to adjust the poverty
threshold (without also adjusting resources) run into similar problems.

In the end, the NRC panel recommended subtracting all medical out-of-pocket (MOOP)
expenses (including health insurance premiums) from income, without trying to value health
                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                           CLOSE HOLD. Page 8

insurance as a part of income or medical need as a part of the thresholds. Hence, family
resources are measured net ofMOOP. Those individuals with good insurance will have few
out- of-pocket expenses; those without insurance who face health problems will have lower
measured incomes as they pay more for medical care.

This adjustment accounts for the larger poverty rates using the NRC methodology. For example,
in 1996 the poverty rate was 13.7% using the current methodology; it would have been 18%
using the NRC methodology, but only 13.2% using the NRC methodology without the medical
expenses adjustment. This adjustment nearly doubles the poverty rate for the elderly, raising it
almost to the rate for children. This adjustment is one of the most controversial of the NRC
recommendations.

There is general agreement that ignoring medical care and medical expenses entirely is not a
good idea, particularly given the rapid increase in medical costs in the past 30 years, the extent of
uninsurance among the low-income population, and this Administration's concern with it. In
addition, if we do not adjust for medical care (in some way) now, it may be much harder to do so
in a few years when we will have better data (because the change will be so dramatic it will be
viewed as another big methodology change).

There are three approaches to incorporating medical care and expenses:

(A) Follow the NRC recommendation and subtract MOOP from family resources. This makes
families with unreimbursed medical expenses less well-off than other families.
                                                                               t;

(B) MOOP could be added to the thresholds rather than subtracted from resources. (The choice
between options (A) and (B) is a technical decision that Census should address.)

(C) Try to impute the value of health insurance to resources, so those with insurance have higher
resources. Health insurance should then also be imputed into the thresholds.

Pros ofAdJustingfor MOOP (either options (A) or (B)):
      While not perfect, under the NRC recommended adjustment families with higher
       unreimbursed medical expenditures will be "poorer." The NRC recommended
       adjustment would also be sensitive to changes in health care financing that would
       decrease MOOP and thereby increase disposable income and reduce poverty.

Cons ofAdjustingfor MOOP (either options (A) or (B)):
     The data that are currently available are out-of-date (but we should have updated
      infonnation available in a more timely fashion within another year.)

      The NRC recommended approach relies on the controversial assumption that all medical
       care expenditures are nondiscretionary. (This concern could be mitigated to some extent
       by imposing a cap on the amount of medical expenses.)
                                              eX-Dump Conversion            CLOSE HOLD. Page 9


Pros ofImputing the Value ofHealth Insurance into Resources and Thresholds:
      Provides a more complete accounting of all medical resources available to a family.

Cons ofImputing the Value ofHealth Insurance into Resources and Thresholds:
     There is no accepted "correct" way to do this. The data here are probably more
      unreliable than the data needed to impute the value of MOOP to families.

      Many analysts agree with the NRC panel that the value of health insurance is quite
       different than (say) the value offood stamps, which are far more fungible. Mixing in
       health insurance coverage with economic need causes interpretational and conceptual
       problems to a measure of economic need.

      To date, Census has been following the NRC recommendation. Ifwe asked them to
       switch to this approach, it might require substantial additional work and seriously delay
       their report.

NOTE: The EOP Policy Working Group recommends that Census incomorate medical care in
some way and recognizes that option (A) is the most practical and realistic for the short term.
However, the group strongly recommends that Census thoroughly investigate the impact of
option (B), and continue work on other approaches to incomorating medical care and
expenditures, such as by valuing medical health insurance (option (C)).


5. Recommendations regarding which alternatives Census should publish and/or how
they should be presented.

The current plan is to publish a small number (maybe 3) of alternatives. For instance, the
Census could publish a 1997-benchmarked poverty rate and a NRC-alternative poverty rate,
providing two alternatives. Or it could publish a 1997-benchmarked poverty rate including all
of the NRC recommendations, and then publish the same thing without MOOP, or without
geographical price variation. (There will be extensive appendices in this report that will report a
wide variety of different poverty calculations, to demonstrate the statistical properties of the
poverty measurement recommended by NRC.)

      Will it be confusing to publish multiple (even a small number ot) alternatives, as opposed
       to only one alternative? How will this affect how the report is received? How should
       these be presented?

      What problems will it create to have multiple alternatives if at some future point we want
       to redefine the official poverty rate to one of these improved alternative measures?
                                            .      H eco~ sManagement System
                                                    eX-DiJmp Conversion      CLOSE HOLD. Page 10

       Table L Poverty Rates and Thresholds under Alternative Measures, 1991-96, CPS

                                Official          Benclunarked      NRC
                                measure           to 1996           Experimental

Poverty Rates
       1991                      14.2               14.5                      18.9
       1992                      14.8               15.3                      19.6
       1993                      15.1               15.7                      20.2
       1994                      14.6               14.7                      19.0
       1995                      13.8                        13.8                    18.2
       1996                      13.7               13.7                      18.0

Thresholds for 2 adults
and 2 children (in dollars) .
       1991                      13,812             11,891           13,891
       1992                      14,228             12,249           14,309
       1993                      14,654             12,616           14,738
       1994                      15,029             12,938           15,115
       1995                      15,455             13,305           15,543
       1996                      15,911             13,698           16,002
                                             Hex-DiJmp Conversion
                                                                              CLOSE HOLD. Page 11

                  Table 2. Poverty Rates under Alternative Measures, 1996, CPS

                               Official             BenchmarkedNRC
                               measure              to 1996                Experimental

AU persons                      13.7                  13.7                         18.0

Children                        20.5                  18.1                         23.8
Nonelderlyadults                11.4                 .11.5                         15.0
Elderly                 10.8                 15.6                          20.4

White                           11.2                  11.8                         15.6
Black                           28.4                  25.2                         32.0
Hispanic origin                 29.4                  28.5                         37.7

One or more workers            9.5                    10.0                         13.6

Persons in family of type:
       Married couple           6.9                   7.8                   11.1
       Female householder       35.8                  32.3                         40.4

Geographic regions:
      Northeast                 12.7                  14.3                         18.8
      Midwest                   10.7                  10.3                         13.8
      South                     15.1                  14.2                         18.3
      West                      15.4                  16.1                         21.0

Metro/CC                        19.6                  19.2                         24.7
NotCC                           9.4                   10.6                         14.1
Nonmetro                        15.9                  13.5                         17.5
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                           CLOSE HOLD. Page 12

                                       APPENDIX
           The Effect of the Poverty Measure on Program Eligibility and Benefits

       The Congressional Research Service has identified 26 programs that are affected by the
measure of poverty. Many of the program connections to the poverty definition are unique, and
many are highly complex. Hence, we do not yet have a precise estimate of how program costs
or coverage would be affected.

        We should not leap to the conclusion that this large number of programs would dictate a
large Federal cost impact of a new measure of poverty. Many of the affected programs are
small, and many of the programs may be affected to only a limited degree by even a change in the
measured aggregate incidence of poverty. Some ofthe programs are discretionary, meaning that
their aggregate cost is set by appropriation; a change in the measure of poverty would affect only
the geographic distribution of those funds (though that could, in itself, be a matter of political
concern, if such reallocations should prove to be significant). However, where at least a few
large programs are involved, it is essential to investigate the potential impact carefully.

       There are two schools of thought on the potential budgetary or allocational effect of a
change in the definition of poverty.

        Gordon Fisher, the analyst at HHS who oversees the production of the poverty guidelines
used in some programs, presents one perspective in a recent paper:

       A number of people believe that the poverty guidelines affect many big entitlement
       programs. That belief is an exaggeration ofthe actual situation. Most of the Federal
       programs using the guidelines are medium-sized or small, with only a few big programs.
       Moreover, most...are discretionary programs ... Only a few programs using the guidelines
       are mandatory: Medicaid, the Food Stamp Program, and child nutrition programs (mainly
       the National School Lunch Program).!

       Offering a different perspective, a recent issue of Focus, the periodical of the Institute for
Research on Poverty, notes:

       For e((ample, the NRC study panel proposed that the measure take into account
       work-related expenses in families where at least one person is employed. Such a change
       could have important implications for the allocation of federal funds between local areas
       where the proportions of working and nonworking families differ. Including geographic
       variations in housing costs might have similar far-reaching effects. Before introducing a
       new property measure for program purposes, policy makers must determine whether the

      IG. Fisher, "Disseminating the Administrative Version and Explaining the
Administrative and Statistical Versions of the Federal Poverty Measure." Clinical Sociology
Review, vol. 15 (1997), p. 165.
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                              CLOSE HOLD. Page 13

       resulting redistribution of resources will be more equitable, or will have unexpected and
       capricious effects.

        As Fisher suggests, the discretionary - mandatory distinction is important. As noted
above, the issue for discretionary programs is not the amount of funding, which is determined by
appropriations (though Congress could change future appropriations under the influence of a
changed measure of poverty), but rather the geographic allocation of a fixed amount of
appropriations. The geographic allocation of relevant discretionary program funds can depend
upon the incidence .of poverty in particular locations. Therefore, these programs are affected by
the actual poverty measure, based on the official thresholds and income concept. The ties
between these programs and poverty vary considerably, and staff are undertaking the task of
determining how much effect a change in the poverty concept could have. These allocations
mayor may not change by much, depending upon the extent to which the new poverty measure
reallocated poverty geographically; the role of poverty in the allocation ofthe discretionary funds
(some programs use poverty as only one of several indexes by which to distribute funding); the
lag between the measurement of poverty and the actual effect on the program (some programs
use poverty as measured in the decennial census); and other factors that can be determined only
through a program-by-program search.

        Besides the official poverty thresholds and the income definition, there are poverty
guidelines. The Federal poverty guidelines are the version ofthe official poverty measure used
for program purposes. They are issued by HHS annually, and are based on a simplified and
updated version of the previous year's Census poverty measure.

        Staff are in the process of determining the potential effects of a change in the poverty
measure on the two largest programs affected by the poverty measure, Medicaid and the Food
Stamp Program, as well as the smaller programs. In Medicaid, while most recipients qualify for
coverage because of their participation in other means-tested programs such as TANF and SSI
(programs that do not use the poverty line in their eligibility criteria), changes in poverty
thresholds could affect at least three major Medicaid eligibility groups: women, infants and
children up to age 6 with family il}comes below 133 percent of poverty and children from age 6
to 18 with incomes at or below the poverty level (this provision is being phased in for all poor
children under age 19 by FY 2002); families, children and other uninsured in the Medicaid
waiver States that have extended coverage beyond current law requirements based on income in
relation to the poverty guidelines; and new groups oflow-income Medicare beneficiaries who
qualify for partial coverage under Medicaid. In all, people whose eligibility for Medicaid is
related to the poverty line are estimated to account for about 20 percent of Medicaid recipients.
Since most are in families with incomes well below the specified level, only a small fraction
would actually be affected by a poverty line change. Further, most of the new enrollees would
be children, whose average health care costs are low. Still, Medicaid is such a large program
that even a small proportionate change in costs could involve a significant number of dollars.

       The poverty guidelines are used in the Food Stamp Program to set gross income
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          CLOSE HOLD. Page 14

eligibility--only families with gross incomes below 130% of the poverty line are eligible for food
stamps. Actual food stamp benefits are calculated based on net income, however--income after
deductions for work expenses and various other things. Net income is compared to a specific
benefit allotment, determined nationally for each family size, and that benefit is reduced by 30
cents for every dollar of net income the family receives. In practice, the benefit allotment for
most families with incomes near the gross income eligibility limit would be small. Many
families would be eligible only for zero benefits. Even where families are eligible for some
positive benefits, take-up rates among those eligible for small amounts of food stamp benefits
tend to be low--the hassle of getting and using food stamps exceeds their value for most such
eligibles. Thus, the gross income eligibility cut-offfor food stamps is more theoretical than
real--families at or near 130% of the poverty line will almost always be eligible only for very low
or zero benefits, and are unlikely to participate in the program. For these reasons, we would
expect the effect on Food Stamp costs to be smaller than that for Medicaid.


