RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CERDA_J )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1998 22:19:32.30

SUBJECT: COURT SAYS DRUG DEALERS WITH GUNS IN CAR CAN GET EXTRA ...

TO: Jose Cerda III                            CERDA J   ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Michelle Crisci                           CRISCI M ) Autoforward to: Remote Address
READ: NOT READ

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro                     SHlMABUKUR L ) Autoforward to: Remote Add
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
Date: 06/08/98 Time: 20:52
SCourt says drug dealers with guns in car can get extra prison time
    WASHINGTON (AP)    A federal law adding five years to the prison
sentence of anyone who carries a gun while selling or buying
illegal drugs can apply to those who keep a gun locked in a car's
glove compartment or trunk, the Supreme Court ruled Monday.
    The 5-4 decision made the law a more potent weapon in Congress'
war on drugs, and could affect thousands of federal cases each
year. Federal appeals courts had disagreed on what Congress had in
mind when it passed the somewhat ambiguously worded law.
    Drug traffickers arrested while in or near their cars can be
convicted of carrying a gun even if it is not immediately
accessible, the justices ruled in a pair of cases from rural
Louisiana and Boston.
     "The generally accepted contemporary meaning of the word
'carry' includes the carrying of a firearm in a vehicle, " Justice
Stephen G. Breyer wrote for the court.
     President Clinton praised the ruling, saying that despite
falling crime rates, "guns and drugs remain serious problems among
our youth and in many of our neighborhoods. Today's decision is one
more victory for law enforcement and law-abiding citizens in the
fight against crime and drugs."
    Defense lawyers decried the rUling. Gerald Lefcourt, president
of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said the
decision "ignores the plain language of the statute, the clear
intention of Congress and the multitude of laws already available
to punish drug dealers. ' ,
    He predicted the law would serve no purpose "other than to add
to our already overflowing prisons."
    In other matters Monday, the court:
      Heard arguments over Whitewater independent counsel Kenneth
Starr's efforts to obtain the notes of a meeting between
presidential aide Vincent Foster and his lawyer nine days before
Foster's 1993 suicide.
      Ruled in a Nebraska case that jurors in capital punishment
cases do not always have to be given the option of finding a
  . ,.
defendant guilty of a lesser crime, one that does not carry a death
sentence.
     Told New Mexico's highest court it was wrong in blocking the
extradition to Ohio of an American Indian activist who faces
charges of violating parole and whom the New Mexico court called
"a refugee from injustice.' ,
     Agreed to use a Kentucky case to clarify when hospitals can be
forced to pay monetary damages for "dumping," or moving to other
facilities some patients needing emergency care.
     Said it will decide in an environmental dispute from
Pennsylvania whether private citizens can sue over government
agency regulations that allegedly result in racial discrimination.
    In the gun-carrying decision, the court interpreted a federal
law that adds five years to the prison term of anyone who "uses or
carries"  a gun "during and in relation to"     a drug-trafficking
crime.
    Frank Muscarello got the extra five years for carrying a gun
when arrested in Tangipahoa Parish, La., in 1994 while distributing
marijuana from his car. He had a loaded pistol in the car's locked
glove compartment.
    Cocaine traffickers Donald Cleveland and Enrique Gray-Santana
also were hit with the extra five years after their convictions in
Boston. When arrested, they had three loaded pistols inside a
duffel bag locked in the trunk of their rental car.
    In an unanimous 1995 decision, the Supreme Court said
Prosecutors cannot invoke the "use"     facet of the law unless they
show "active employment of the firearm."     Just having a gun nearby
in case of a confrontation is not enough to be in violation of the
use provision, the justices ruled then.
    But Breyer's opinion for the court said someone does "carry"      a
gun when transporting it in his or her car.
    Breyer was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day
O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas.
    Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Ruth Bader
Ginsburg, Antonin Scalia and David H. Souter dissented. Writing for
the four, Ginsburg said the court "should leave it to Congress to
speak in language that is clear and definite if the Legislature
wishes to impose the sterner penalty. ' ,
    The voting alignment was unusual. Stevens has earned a
reputation as the justice most sensitive to the rights of criminal
suspects, while Rehnquist and Scalia are viewed as tough
law-and-order jurists.
APNP-06-08-98 2055EDT


