    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Edward W. Correia ( CN;Edward W. Correia/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO)           )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUN-1998 12:09:04.00

    SUBJECT:   Benchmarking Summary

    TO: Peter Rundlet ( CN;Peter Rundlet/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)          )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Dawn M. Chirwa ( CN;Dawn M. Chirwa/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Susan M. Liss ( CN;Susan M. Liss/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN)     )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN;Tracey E. Thornton/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)                )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN;Maria Echaveste/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Steven L. Schooner ( CN;Steven L. Schooner/OU;OMB/O;EOP @ EOP [ OMB ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Sally Katzen ( CN;Sally Katzen/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Audrey T. Haynes ( CN;Audrey T. Haynes/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)        )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Charles M. Brain ( CN;Charles M. Brain/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN;Ann F. Lewis/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)        )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN;Sylvia M. Mathews/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)              )
    READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
    . FOL purposes of the meeting today, here is the latest version of a summary
      of benchmarking. This is a draft of what would be released with the new
      rule.

    ;======;;;========== ATTACHMENT   1 ;;=======;=;;====;==
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D62)MAIL48795206B.126 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000972E000000020000321E9EBED81EAD3A515344
    C4FA04E701E1DF65A15D545B32A7711E5B25708888B6DOAA2D361306B687007F7F279E05F8ECAA
    7DFCOA9971037B9AEDB1B69B48DC43E1E23468DB273F24CC68603143367F5EOEE0300553B570DF
    95624E3DB3701A31C17DCC2CDBOOB10F37617B45FFB2E7E189D19BD5DBAD453FB7E9637D1F4F52
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


                 THE PRICE EVALUATION ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM

        A key component of the Clinton administration's reform of the federal govemment's
procurement assistance programs is its new price evaluation adjustment program. This program
was authorized by Congress in 1994 as part ofthe Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act. The
first phase of the program, which is being implemented through a revision of the Federal
Acquisition Regulation, goes into effect on - - - -

        Under this new program, owners of small disadvantaged businesses ("SDB' s") bidding
on competitively awarded federal contracts may qualify for a price evaluation credit of up to
10%. Credits will be available only to businesses that have been certified as SDB' s by the Small
Business Administration. These credits help level the playing field for minority groups who have
encountered discrimination in their efforts to compete. Other than receiving these credits, SDB's
must compete with all other businesses to win federal contracts. Price evaluation credits are not
set-asides. They do not assure that any firm, or group of firms, will win a contract.

      : In order to ensure that the use of these credits is fair and meets legal requirements, they
will be available only in industries in which minority-owned firms continue to suffer the effects
of discrimination. "Benchmarking" provides a methodology for identifying these industries by
comparing the actual federal procurement market share of minority-owned businesses with the
federal procurement market share that would be expected in the absence of discrimination.
Credits will be available only in industries where the actual federal procurement market share
("utilization") falls short of the expected federal procurement market share ("capacity").

Constitutional Requirements

        The administration developed this benchmarking methodology to ensure that federal
procurement complies with the Supreme Court's decision in Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena.
In Adarand, the Court held that it is constitutional to provide targeted assistance to
minority-owned businesses as long as two requirements are met. The first is that the assistance
must serve a "compelling interest." This requirement is satisfied if there has been discrimination
that has harmed minority business owners in the particular industry where assistance is to be
provided. The second requirement is that the remedy is "narrowly tailored," that is, any
assistance targeted to members of a certain race or ethnic group must be necessary to remedy
discrimination and must be carefully designed to address its effects.

       A. Compelling Interest

       Based on an extensive review of evidence, the Department of Justice has established that
discrimination has harmed minority businesses. In addition to commissioning an analysis of
dozens of studies of industries throughout the country, DOJ also reviewed a long history of
Congressional findings of discrimination. Congress relied on these findings in enacting
affirmative action and other remedial legislation. For example, there is substantial evidence that


                                                 1
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
minority-owned businesses have been prevented from obtaining access to capital, from
participating in trade associations, and from gaining enough experience to become bonded. Most
of the present effects of discrimination stem from discrimination in the private sector, not in the
public sector. These limitations have erected substantial barriers to minority-owned firms and
have hampered their ability to win contracts. For example, in FY 1996, 25 percent of firms that
participated in SBA's 8(a) program were SDB's, but SDB's won only about 6 percent offederal
                                                                                                          (
contracting dollars. Consistent with Congress's long-standing determinations, the government
has a compelling interest in providing targeted assistance to minority businesses.

       B. Narrow Tailoring

        The use of benchmarks helps satisfy the Supreme Court's "narrow tailoring" requirement
by providing a means for determining whether the effects of discrimination still burden small
businesses in a particular market. Credits will be used only in those markets where it is still
necessary to offset the effects of discrimination. Based on FY 1996 data, the Department of
Commerce estimates that industries representing about 74% of federal contract dollars awarded
to SDB's will be eligible for price credits. The capacity and utilization of minority-owned
businesses in 70 two digit SIC code major industry groups and nine Census divisions for each of
the three construction major industry groups were determined by analyzing data representing all
the firms in the United States that bid on federal contracts or participated in the 8(a) programs
administered by the Small Business Administration. This group of firms represents those that
were ready, willing and able to fulfill federal contracts in FY. 1996.

        The "utilization" of minority-owned firms is simply a measure of the total dollar value of
the federal contracts awarded to them in FY 1996. Calculating the "capacity" of theses firms is
more complex. In order to estimate capacity, the benchmarks take into account various
characteristics of firms that bear directly on the value of contracts that they receive, including the
age and size of the firm. This approach allows Commerce Department statisticians to estimate
the value of contracts a minority-owned firm would be expected to receive if its success in
winning federal contracts equaled that of all other firms in the industry of equal age and size. An
outside panel of statisticians and economists reviewed this methodology and concluded that it
was the best approach possible.

 The Scope of the Program

        Three agencies, the Department of Defense, NASA, and the Coast Guard have had
authorization to offer credits since FY 1994. From the inception of the program, DOD has
awarded about $172 million in contracts through this program. Under the rule announced today,
all agencies will be required to implement the price evaluation credit program. Currently; data are
available to allow application of price credits to SDB's that are prime contractors. This step is
estimated to increase the share of price contracts awarded to SDB's from 6.9% to 7.6% (about $1
billion). Evaluation credits will be extended to subcontractors on              . Sometime during
the next year, the Small Business Administration will also use benchmarks in administering the


                                                  2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

8(a) program. Benchmarks will provide guidance to program administrators, for example, in
determining the number and type of firms that will participate in the prograni. Benchmarks will
not apply to the Department of Transportation's program for Disadvantaged Business
Enterprises, which is administered by grantees, such as state and local governments.

The Advantages of Benchmarking

       The benchmarking/price evaluation adjustment program offers several advantages in
designing government affirmative action programs to assist SDB's.

        Constitutionality -- The program responds to the core concerns about
procurement-related affirmative action programs expressed by the Supreme Court. The Court has
made clear that government may remedy discrimination by the government itself or by the
private sector. However, the Court has also indicated that any affirmative action program should
be designed to address the actual effects of past discrimination. Benchmarking provides a means
for carefully targeting our efforts to remedy those effects.

        Flexibility -- Benchmarks are not quotas. The price evaluation adjustment program
includes a series of provisions designed to target assistance carefully, to ensure flexibility and to
maintain vigorous competition. Price credits will not be available in all industries, only those
where there is evidence of remaining effects of discrimination. Price credits will be available
only when the government has concluded that race-neutral efforts are inadequate to address past
discrimination. Even in cases when utilization falls short of capacity in a major industry
grouping, the relevant agencies retain discretion to adjust or eliminate the credit under some
circumstances.

         Preserving Competition -- Price and evaluation adjustments are not set-asides. No firm
or group of firms is guaranteed any contract. These credits provide a small boost for
minority-owned firms when there has been a record of past discrimination. However, these firms
must compete with all other firms for contracts. As a result, government can make good faith
efforts to remedy prior discrimination, while preserving the incentives for firms to compete
vigorously for taxpayer dollars.

        Annual Review -- Federal procurement data will be reviewed annually to ensure that
price credits are available only in those industries where the effects of discrimination persist.

Industries Where Credits are Available

        Benchmarking estimates are based on two digit SIC code major industry groups. With the
exception of construction, for which regional benchmarks have been developed, the estimates are
for the nation as a whole. Based on these benchmarks, the Department of Commerce has
identified the industries in which credits will be available. A table showing these industries
appears in the Federal Register of June _ , 1998.


                                                  3
