    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL            (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUN-1998 18:36:22.00

    SUBJECT:   NY Needle Exchange Demonstration

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Thought you might want to see this.

    Apparently, there will be another needle exchange
    funding ban amendment on the Labor/H approps bill because
    they had so much fun passing the last one.  Whoopee.



    FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE            Contact: Chris Lanier,
    Monday, June 8, 1998                             National Coalition to Save
    Lives
    Now: [  ..E61J~l.<~LJ [00       a]                               Jeanne
    Bergman,
                                                                     cell phone
    during
    demonstration:      P6/(b)(6)

    At Massive UN Demonstration for Clean Needles for Drug Users,
    AIDS Protestors Blame Clinton for Thousands of New HIV Infections

    (NEW YORK June 8) Over a thousand demonstrators marched down 42nd Street
    to the United Nations this afternoon to demand federal funding for
    needle exchange programs to prevent HIV among intravenous drug users.
    The marchers, who snarled the mid-town rush-hour traffic, charged that
    President Bill Clinton's refusal to lift the ban on federal funding for
    needle exchange programs would result in tens of thousands of new AIDS
    cases in the United States. Clinton was at the United Nations today to
    speak at a conference on International Drug Control Policy, seeking
    international support for his "War on Drugs."

    The protestors carried 33 coffins, some of them child-sized, to signify
    the number of HIV infections resulting every day from Clinton's policy.
    A giant puppet of President Clinton as the grim reaper complete with
    black robe and bloody hands, accompanied the marchers. Some
    demonstrators wore targets signs symbolizing that they are the
    "collateral damage" in the presidents "drug war".

    Marvin Crawford, an HIV-positive veteran who said he was infected from
    sharing syringes and who traveled from Philadelphia today for the
    protest, compared the President's syringe ban to the infamous experiment
    conducted by the Tuskegee Institute, which allowed hundreds of
    African-Americans infected with syphilis to remain untreated.  "Needle
    exchange is Clinton's Tuskegee," Crawford charged.  "The President knows
    what he has to do to save lives, but he won't do it. Because of him,
    thousands of people will be infected, most of them people of color.
    Clinton's "War on Drugs" is really a war on poor and minority
    communities."



    On April 20, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala informed
    Clinton that scientific research has proven that needle exchange
    programs effectively prevent the transmission of HIV and hepatitis, and
    do not lead to increased drug use.  Her long-awaited action cleared the
    way for the President to lift the ban on federal funding for sterile
    syringe programs. Clinton accepted the findings, but stated that in
    spite of them he would continue to block the use of federal funds for
    needle exchange programs. HIV prevention advocates charge that the
    President's decision is politically motivated and will cause tens of
    thousands of new and preventable HIV infections by the year 2000.

    "Clinton says he is worried about sending the wrong message to kids,"
    said Chris Lanier of the National Coalition to Save Lives Now, which
    advocates for access to clean needles for IV drug users.  "But the
    message he's sending now is that it's okay to let people who use drugs
    get AIDS; it's okay to let their kids be orphaned, it's okay to let
    their communities be devastated by HIV. Well, we're here to say it's
    not okay.  Clean needles save lives, and those lives are precious."

    Organizations participating in the protest included the National
    Coalition to Save Lives Now; The Harm Reduction Coalition, ACT UP/NY,
    ACT UP Philadelphia, ADAPT,   CitiWide Harm Reduction Program, CHAI
    project New Brunswick, N~, East New York Underground, Exponents/ARRIVE,
    Harm Reduction Care Network of New York, Housing Works, The Lower East
    Side Needie Exchange, the Latino Commission on AIDS, Moving Equipment,
    New York City AIDS Housing Network, Nice Donut, NATAP, positive Health
    Project, POZ Magazine, St. Ann's Corner of Harm Reduction, and the
    Streetside Health Project.


