     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUN-1998 13:43:45.00

     SUBJECT:   Look at tobacco graph in POTUS speech -- at end

    TO: Elena Kagan      CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Cynthia Dailard      CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Do you think it's too forward leadning re: tax cuts? i.e. will people
     think we've caved?
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP on 06/09/98
     01:41 PM ---------------------------




     Lowell A. Weiss
     06/09/98 01:21:50 PM
     Record Type:    Record

     To:      Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
     cc:
     Subject:         Re: Any speech update?

    Draft 6/9/98 1:15pm
    Lowell Weiss
    PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
    REMARKS AT TRANSPORTATION BILL SIGNING
    THE WHITE HOUSE
    June 9, 1998

            Acknowledge:  introducer Robin McNab; Sec. Slater, a visionary and
    vigilant steward of our nationD,s transportation system, and the members
    of his legislative team, including Janno [JAN-ohl Lieber, Patty Doersch
    [DORSH1, and Richard Steinman; Members of Congress, especially Majority
    Leader Lott, Sen. Baucus, Sen. Chafee, Rep. Shuster, and Rep. Oberstar;
    Gov. Schafer; Mayor Bill Campbell of Atlanta, Mayor Clarence Anthony of
    South Bay, Florida, and other municipal officials here today; union
    presidents; Gov. George voinovich could not be with us today'because he is
    back in Ohio with his mother, who is ill.  Our thoughts and prayers are
    with them.

            Forty-two years ago this month, President Eisenhower signed the
    Federal Aid Highway Act into law.  That bill, sponsored in the Senate by
    Albert Gore, Sr., gave rise to the most efficient network of roads in
    history, connecting millions of Americans to the economic mainstream,
    ushering in two decades of unparalleled growth.



        When I ran for President in 1992, I saw that the concrete
foundations built in the Eisenhower era were crumbling.  If America was to
roll into the 21st Century full-speed ahead, we had to be willing once
again to make historic, long-term investments in our roads, bridges, and
transportation systems. That is why I am so pleased today to sign the
landmark Transportation Equity Act for the 21st century, which will meet
my challenge to build the pathways of the future while maintaining the
fiscal discipline that allowed us to achieve our historic balanced budget.

        This act will strengthen America.  It helps communities modernize and
build the roads, bridges, transit systems, and railways that link people
of our great and vast country together and permit the free flow of goods.
And it supports hundreds of thousands of jobs.

         This act will save lives.  It allows us to develop advanced air bag
 technologies, offer incentives for increased seat belt use, make roads
 safer, and get bad drivers anp vehicles off the road.

         This act will protect the environment.  It expands recreational trails
 and bike paths, promotes mass transit, and helps communities meet national
 standards for healthy air.

        This act will expand opportunity.   It offers transportation assistance to
move more Americans from welfare to work -- because, after all, if you
canD,t get to work, you canD,t go .to work.
It protects the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise program, so that
minority- and women-owned businesses have an equal opportunity to compete
for transportation projects.

        This act will allow us to reserve our budget surpluses until we have
saved Social Security first.  Unlike the original transportation bills
passed in the House and Senate, this bill is paid for line by line and
dime by dime. And although I am still concerned that it spends too much,
it will not squeeze out other critical investments in education, health
care, research and development, and the environment.

         I am disappointed, however, that the bill does not go far enough
 to ensure that there is a .08 blood alcohol standard in every state.  I
 will continue to fight for it in this legislative session. Lowering the
 blood alcohol standard across the nation will not keep a single adult from
 drinking responSibly, but it will save hundreds of lives.   I also am
 disappointed that we once again had to fight off several last-minute
 anti-environmental riders.  I urge Congress to abandon this practice so
 critical environmental matters can be debated openly, in the light of day.

          And now that we are honoring our commitment to build the
 transportation infrastructure for the 21st Century, we must now turn to
 the task of building the education infrastructure our students desperately
 need. All the intelligent transportation systems in the world wonD,t
 matter much if we let the education system come crumbling down around our
 children.   So I call on the Members of Congress here today to work
 together, in the same spirit of bipartisanship that produced this histor{c
 transportation bill, to help pass my initiative for modernizing AmericaD,s
 schools.   For less than one-tenth the cost of this transportation bill --
 and without spending a cent of the surplus -- we can help ensure that all
 our children will be able to learn in safe, modern, well-equipped schools.

          [The highway bill I am signing today shows what both parties can do when
 we bring our honorable differences to the table and act in the national


 interest.  I believe that this constructive, bipartisan approach is the
 way we can and must pass comprehensive tobacco legislation.  Lawmakers of
 both parties sUpport tax relief for married couples and an increase in
 drug-prevention efforts. And lawmakers of both parties support strong,
 comprehensive and bipartisan tobacco legislation.  We should put the
 tobacco bill -- and all these issues -- to a vote on the floor of the
 Senate, up or down. The public expects us to work out our differences.
 We cannot allow the most vital public health measure in a generation to
 fall victim to partisan infighting.J

 # # #


