     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:I0-JUN-1998 11:23:48.00

     SUBJECT:     Comprehensive PIR Accomplishments List

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP on 06/10/98
     11:31 AM ---------------------------




                Beverly J. Barnes
                06/10/98 10:38:05 AM

     Record Type: Record

     To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
     cc:
     Subject: Comprehensive PIR Accomplishments List

     (sent to Cabinet, board members, press.      other white house staff have
     short list.)



     Message Sent
     To:~--~~~~--~~~~--------------------------------------
     Sylvia M. Mathews/WHO/EOP
     Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP
     Judith A. Winston/PIR/EOP
     Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
     Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP
     Laura K. Demeo/WHO/EOP
     Marsha Scott/WHO/EOP
     Audrey M. Hutchinson/PIR/EOP
     Michele Cavataio/PIR/EOP
     Andrew J. Mayock/WHO/EOP
     Barbara Semedo/PIR/EOP
     Lydia Sermons/PIR/EOP
     David K. Chai/PIR/EOP
     Allison J. King/PIR/EOP
     Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP


     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00 .

     .TEXT:
      Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D20]MAIL43908706H.126 to ASCII,
       The following is a HEX DUMP:
                                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    ONE AMERICA IN THE 21ST CENTURY:
                                        THE PRESIDENT'S INITIATIVE ON RACE

            'Today, I ask the American people to join me in a great national effon to perfect the promise ofAmerica for this new
time as we seek to build our more perfect union. ... That is the unfinished work of our time, to lift the burden of race and redeem
the promise of Amenca. "
                                                               -- President Clinton, June 14, 1997

The President's Plan. The President is leading the nation in an effort to become One America in the 21st Century: a
place where we resped others' differences and, at the same time, embrace the values that unite us. To achieve this
goal, President Clinton has developed the following plan:


1) Develop Policy That Offers Opportunity To All Those Who Work For It.       Taking the recommendation of the
President's Advisory Board, the primary focus of our policy actions will be to enhance educational and economic
opportunity. A number of policy adions have been announced, including creating education empowerment wnes,
increasing quality teaching in undeserved areas and stepping up enforcement 10 stop discrimination in housing.

2) Engage Americans In A Broad And Constructive Dialogue. The President is encouraging communities across the
country to engage in construdive dialogues on race. He is calling on them, not only to stand against discrimination,
but also 10 build greater understanding across racial line and to find resolutions to honest differences. From
construdive dialogue, positive actions take root, like the Akron Coming Together Projed.

3) Highlight Promising Practices That Are Working. Community efforts are crucial to the success of the President's
Initiative on Race. In communities throughout the country, people are working to bridge racial divides and 10
create equal opportunity for all. The Race Initiative staff is identifying and creating a compilation of these efforts,
named "promising pradices," so that others may participate in them or replicate them in their own communities,
schools, businesses and religious organizations. These promising pradices have been highlighted on the One
America web site, in remarks by the President and at Advisory Board meetings.

4) Recruit Leaders. The President is reaching out 10 leaders in several areas of American life with a special
emphasis on recruiting youth, education, religious and business leaders. "One America" leaders are those people
who take up the President's call by organizing efforts in their communitieS or professions. Through their leadership,
the President's Initiative on Race will reach communities throughout the nation.

5) Advisory Board The President appointed a small, diverse group that will advise and assist him in outreach
efforts and consultations with experts. They were chosen based on their outstanding leadership on this issue and
their contributions to America's ongoing dialogue about race and reconciliation.

6) Deliver A Report from the President. This winter the President will issue a report in which he will: 1) present his
vision of One America, including an assessment of the growing diversity of our nation; 2) reflect the work that has
occurred during the initiative; and 3) provide recommendations and solutions that enable individuals, communities,
businesses, public and private organizations and government at all levels 10 address difficult issues and build on our
best possibilities.                                                              .




                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                     THE PRESIDENTS INmATIVE ON RACE:
                                      Taking Action To Help Build One America

 SUMMARY OF MAJOR EVENTS / ANNOUNCEMENTS
 As OFilPRIL 2, 2010

DEVELOPING POLlCY THAT OFFERS OPPORTUNITY TO ALL THOSE WHO WORK FOR IT

Civil Rights

Increased Civil Rights Enforcement: On Martin Luther King Jr. Day, January 19, 1998, Vice President Gore
announced the Administration's proposal for the largest single increase in funding to enforce existing civil rights laws
in nearly two decades. Through new reforms and heightened commitment to enforcement, the Administration will
seek to prevent discrimination before it occurs and to punish those who do discriminate in employment, education,
housing and health care, and against those with disabilities. The Clinton Administration's FY 1999 budget contains
$602 million for civil rights enforcement agencies and offices -- an increase of $86 million over last year's funding.

         Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEPC): The cornerstone of the improved civil rights
         enforcement effort isa $37 million increase (15 percent) for the EEOC. Through increased use of
         mediation, improved information technology and an expanded investigative staff, the EEOC will reduce the
         average time for resolving private-sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months and cut the backlog
         of cases from 64,000 to 28,000, by the year 2000.

         Housing & Urban Development (HUD) -- Fair Housing: To respond to the increase in reported cases of
         serious fair housing violations, HUD will double the number of its civil rights enforcement actions by the
         year 2000. HUD also has committed $15 million to 67 fair housing centers around the country to assist in
         fighting housing discrimination this year.     In addition, the President's budget proposes $10 million for a
         targeted enforcement initiative that will use paired testing -- identical applicants of different races or genders
         approaching Realtors or landlords -- to detect and eliminate housing discrimination. Also, Secretary Cuomo
         now focuses on one race-based housing discrimination case each week and conducts a community forum
         around each case to turn the negative experience· into a positive one that helps bring the community
         together.

         Coordination of Civil Rights: An additional $1 million will allow the Department of Justice's Civil Rights
         Division to enhance coordination of federal civil rights enforcement policy among agencies. Improved
         coordination will lead to more consistent enforcement of civil rights laws, broader dissemination of best
         practices and improved data collection.

Education

Hispanic Education Action Plan. Nearly one in three Hispanics between 25 and 29 years old left school without a
diploma or GED. To correct this situation, President Clinton announced an unprecedented $600 million in the FY
99 budget to help Latino youngsters master the basics of reading and math. The funding will also pay for programs
to help them learn English, stay in school, prepare for college and, ultimately, succeed in college.

Reducing Class Size In Early Grades. The President proposed a $12.4 billion, seven-year initiative to help local
schools reduce class size in grades 1-3 from a national average of 22 to 18 students. Through this program, local


                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

schools will be able to hire an additional 100,000 well-prepared teachers. Funding also will be provided to states for
teacher training and to require new teachers to pass state competency tests.

Education Opportunity Zones. The President proposed $1.5 billion, over five years, to bolster reform efforts by
high-poverty urban and rural·school districts that demonstrate both a commitment to and a track record in improving
educational achievement. Funds will be used to improve accountability, turn around failing schools, recognize
outstanding teachers, deal with ineffective ones and expand public school choice. Added investments in these
communities will accelerate progress and provide successful models of system-wide, standards-based reform.

Getting Good Teachers to Underserved Areas. Responding to the need for a diverse and excellent teaching force,
President Clinton proposed a $350 million program to attract talented people of all backgrounds to teach at
low-income schools across the nation. The funding also will be used to dramatically improve the quality of training
given to future teachers. This new program will help bring nearly 35,000 new teachers into high-poverty schools in
urban and rural areas over the next five years. In addition, it will upgrade the quality of teacher preparation at
institutions of higher education that work in partnership with inner-city and poor rural area schools.

High Hopes for America's Youth. The High Hopes initiative would provide $140 million in FY 1999 to encourage
degree-granting colleges to establish partnerships with middle and junior high schools with large numbers of
low-income children. Working with parents, community members, religious groups, and businesses, these
partnerships provide information about what it means and takes to go to college as well as about available support
services -- such as mentoring, tutoring, college visits, summer programs, after-school activities, and counseling -- to
help young people stay in school, study hard and go on to college.

School Construction and Modernization. To address the crucial issue of school construction, the President proposed
federal tax credits to pay interest on nearly $22 billion in bonds to build and renovate public schools -- largely in the
100 - 120 school districts with the greatest number of low-income children. This more than doubles the assistance
proposed last year. In addition, the President's FY 1999 budget proposes a 59 percent increase in funding for
construction, facilities improvement, and repair of Native American schools.

Economic Opportunity

Increasing Capital to Minority Businesses. Vice President Gore announced an unprecedented agreement between SBA
and the "Big Three" U.S. automakers to increase subcontracting awards to minority businesses by nearly $3 bi1lion
over the next three years -- a 50 percent increase over current levels.

Tapping the Potential ofAmerica's Urban and Rural Communities. The President's FY 99 budget includes $400
million -- nearly triple the FY 98 appropriation -- for a new Community Empowerment Fund (CEF) that is expected
to leverage an estimated $2 bi1lion in private-sector loans to help communities invest in businesses and create jobs.

Supporting Minority Business Communities. Vice President Gore unveiled aggressive plans to increase lending
and business services to the African-American and Hispanic business community, nationwide. The SBA has set a
goal of providing an estimated total of$1.86 billion in loans to African-American small businesses over a three-year
period and $2.5 billion worth of loans to Hispanic-owned businesses by the year 2000.

Empowerment Zones (Round II). The President's FY 99 budget provides $150 mi1lion a year for 10 years to fund 15
new urban Empowerment Zones (EZS) and $20 mi1lion a year for 10 years to fund five new rural EZS.              The funds
wi1l be used for economic and social development activities in distressed communities.




                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
Access to Jobs. The Access to Jobs initiative, proposed by President Clinton, will provide resources to assist states
and communities that develop solutions -- such as vanpools and late-night and weekend service -- to' help individuals
with job-related transportation needs. Access to Jobs will leverage other transportation resources by requiring a
dollar-for-dollar match. The transportation bill passed by Congress provides up to $150 million a year for this
initiative.

Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers. The President's FY 99 budget includes $283 million for 50,000 new vouchers
exclusively for people who need housing assistance to make the transition from welfare to work. Local agencies
would have f1exibiliry to design and operate the welfare-to-work voucher program within broad national guidelines,
encouraging maximum local creativiry and innovation. Families could use the housing vouchers to move closer to a
                                                                                                          "-
new job or secure more stable housing.

Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI). The Administration has requested a $45 million increase in
CD FI funding (from $80 million to $125 million) to allow the Fund to provide additional financial assistance and
expand its training and technical assistance initiative~

Opportunity Areas for Out of School Youth. Proposed in the President's FY 1998 budget, the Youth Opportuniry
Areas Initiative will provide $250 million in seed-capital grants to Empowerment Zones, Enterprise Communities and
other high-poverty areas to boost the employment rate among out-of-school youth. The Administration is working
with Congress to ensure enactment of job training reform legislation that will secure funding for this important
initiative.

Expanded Youthbuild. This program provides high school dropouts between the ages of 16 and 24 with academic
and job-skills training, as well as apprenticeships building and rehabilitating affordable housing. The President's FY
99 budget requests $45 million for Youth build.

Housing

Expand Low Income Housing Tax Credit by 40 Percent. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) annually allocates to
each state low-income housing tax credits equal to $1.25 per resident. This limit has not been adjusted since the
credit was created in 1986. As a result, the purchasing power of the credit has declined by 40 percent. To adjust
for that, the President's FY 99 budget calls for increasing the limit by 40 percent to $1.75 per capita, at a cost of $1.6
billion over five years. This expansion of credit will help to develop as many as 180,000 additional affordable
rental units over the next five years.

"Play-by-the-Rules" Homeownership Initiative. The FY 99 budget for the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation
includes $25 million for a new initiative that would make homeownership more accessible to families who have a
good rental history but have difficulry purchasing a home. Under this initiative, 10,000 lower-income and minoriry
families who are currently renting would be provided with homeownership counseling and training, assistance with
down payments or closing costs, or second mortgage loans for debt reduction.




                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

Homeownership Zones. The President's FY 99 budget includes $25 million for Homeownership Zones, abandoned
housing and distressed neighborhoods that communities could use the funding to reclaim. Funds could be used for
property acquisition, demolition, site preparation, housing construction or rehabilitation, homeownership counseling,
relocation, and activities to further fair housing and homeowners hip.

Regional Opportunity Counseling. Under this program, public housing authorities partner with nonprofit
organizations to provide counseling to Section 8 certificate and voucher holders to ensure that they are aware of the
full range of housing options. This program recruits landlords to accept Section 8 families. HUD allocated
$36.7 million for 16 regional opportunity counseling sites in FY 96. Last year, the President unsuccessfully
requested an additional $20 million to expand the program to new sites. The Administration has again requested a
$20 million increase in funding for FY 99.

Incentive to Reduce Concentrations of Housing Certificate and Voucher Families. The President's FY 99 budget
provides HUD the option to offer bonuses to Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) for increasing the number of
Section 8 voucher and certificate holders who move to less-distressed areas. These bonuses would encourage PHAs
to identify more housing options for voucher and certificate holders.




Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) Grants to Underserved Areas. The President announced a COPS
program to increase police presence and community policing in neighborhoods where the need is greatest. Under
this initiative, 18 cities will share $106 million to hire 620 new community policing officers. The pilot cities were
selected following an analysis of crime, demographic and economic data. The 18 cities chosen face some of the
highest per population levels of crime and/or economic distress in the United States.

Community Prosecutors: The President's FY 99 budget includes $50 million for grants to promote community
prosecution, which builds on effective community policing strategies. The funds will enable local prosecutors across
the country to playa more active role in crime fighting by spending more time in their neighborhoods, both helping
to solve crimes and preventing them before they happen.

Fighting Hate Crimes. On November 10, 1997, the President and Attorney General Janet Reno hosted the first
White House Conference on Hate Crimes, which featured experts and law enforcement officers from around the
country. The President announced significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get tough on hate
crimes, including:    support for legislation to expand the federal hate crimes law to cover crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender, or disability; the creation of a network of local hate crime working groups; the addition of
approximately 50 FBI agents and federal prosecutors to enforce hate crimes laws; improved collection of data on hate
crimes; and the production of materials to educate the public -- especially youth -- about hate crimes.

Indian Country Law Enforcement. The President's FY 99 budget proposes a $182 million initiative, led by the Justice
and Interior departtnents, to address the public safety crisis in Indian country. The initiative will strengthen Indian
country law enforcement, primarily, by providing anti-crime grants to Indian jurisdictions, increasing the number of
officers per capita and improving the quality of detention facilities.




Eliminating Ethnic Health Disparities. President Clinton announced a $400 million effort initiative that sets a national
goal of eliminating, by the year 2010, longstanding disparities in.the health status of racial and ethnic minority groups
in six key health areas: infant mortality; diabetes; cancer screening and management; heart disease; AIDS; and
immunizations. Currently, for example, African Americans suffer from diabetes at 70 percent higher rates than white
Americans, while Native Americans suffer from diabetes at nearly three times the average rate. Vietnamese women
suffer from cervical cancer at nearly five times the rate of white women, and Latinos have two to three times the rate



                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

of stomach cancer as white Americans. The President announced a five-step plan -- led by Surgeon General and
Assistant Secretary for Health Dr. David Satcher -- to mobilize the resources and expertise of the Federal government,
the private sector, and local communities.

Children's Health Outreach. Minority children make up a disproportionate number of the over 10 million uninsured
children. Mrican-American children make up 25 percent and Hispanic children make up 30 percent of all uninsured
children -- more than twice their percentage of the overall population. The President's budget proposes options for
states to access higher Federal matching funds for outreach activities and to temporarily enroll children at sites like
schools.

Child Care

Child Care and Development Block Grant. The President's budget provides $7.5 billion in block grants to help
working families afford safe, high-quality child care. These new funds will double the number of children in low
and moderate-income families receiving child care subsidies to two million by the year 2002.

After-School Programs. The President has proposed expanding the 21st Century Learning Fund by $800 million
over five years. These start-up funds would generate additional school-community partnerships to establish before-
and after-schools programs, allowing 4,000 schools across the country to implement programs for up to 500,000
children each year.

Early Learning Fund. The President's FY 99 budget would establish a five-year, $3 billion fund for community
grants to promote early childhood development and improve child care quality for young children.

ENGAGING AMERICANS INA BROAD AND CONSTRUClTVE DIALOGUE

Presidential Dialogues. On April 14, 1998, the President held his second national conversation on Race in Houston,
Texas. The town hall session, focusing on race and sports, was broadcast by ESPN. President Clinton's first
national dialogue on race relations took place on December 3, 1997 in Akron, Ohio, and was broadcast nationally by
C-Span. Advisory Board members, Cabinet members and senior Administration officials hosted more than ninety
"watch parties," which were organized around the nation to observe the Akron Town Meeting.           On Capitol Hill,
Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-DC) and Congressman Tom Davis (R-VA) sponsored a
mini-Town-Hall for the D.C. area.      On July 8, the President will join Jim Lehrer for a nationally televised
conversation on race on PBS.

Advisory Board. The Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race is actively involved in public outreach
efforts to engage Americans across the nation in this historic effort. To date, the Advisory Board has held eight
public meetings in five states and the Distrio of Columbia. The meetings have covered topics ranging from
education and housing to employment and the administration of justice. Board members also have individually
participated in several hundred meetings with a wide cross-section of communities and constituencies.

Studying Race. In May, the President's Initiative on Race announced that the National Research Council (NRC),
the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, will coordinate studies by prominent researchers on a range
of topics related to race, including demographic trends. The work will include findings on whites, blacks, American
Indians, Hispanics and Asian Pacific Americans. The project will culminate with a major research conference in
October in Washington D.C.

American Indians/Alaska Natives. American Indians and Alaska Natives have been integrated into the work of the
Initiative as panelists at Advisory Board meetings and in special Tribal leaders meetings hosted by the Initiative.
Advisory Board members and Initiative staff have participated in regional and national conferences hosted by
American Indians and Alaska Natives to hear directly from Indian country. In addition., the Administration
successfully fought back proposed legislation that would have ended sovereign immunity for tribes and, in May, the


                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
President issued an executive order strengthening government-to-government relationships between the tribes and the
US.

Presidential Meeting With Conservative Writers and Academics. When President Clinton launched his Race Initiative,
he called for a national dialogue that includes views from a wide array of people. On December 19, President
Clinton brought together a group of conservatives -- including Ward Connedy, Abigail and Stephen Thernstrom,
Linda Chavez and Elaine Chao -- to continue the dialogue and listen to their opinions on race relations in America.

Sparking Dialogue. The Race Initiative has prompted innumerable conversations about race around the country,
highlighted by an April "Month of Dialogue." During April, 600 colleges and universities were engaged in a
campus week of dialogue, organizing hundreds of race-related events across the nation. On April 30, 41 governors,
22 mayors and more than 100 local YWCAs engaged in dialogues on race during a statewide day of dialogue.

Conversations That Bring Us Together. As part of the Initiative, the Administration launched a program that enlists
Administration appointees, Advisory Board members, Cabinet members and Race Initiative staff to host conversations
in cities throughout the nation. Thousands have taken part in these conversations in cities across the country.

Super Bowl XXXII PSA. In a unique partnership, the White House and the National Football League teamed up to
create a public service announcement for President Clinton's Initiative on Race. The PSA aired before an estimated
audience of 140 million people prior to the 1998 Superbowl kick-off. The spot highlighted examples of players
from different racial and ethnic backgrounds coming together for a common goal. President Clinton reminded all
Americans that we are on the same team and that, through working together, we can build one America.

Informing The Nation. For the first tini.e in history, the President's Economic Report to Congress included an entire
chapter devoted to reviewing trends in racial and ethnic economic inequality.



HIGHLIGHTING PROMISING PRACI'ICES THAT ARE WORKING TO BUILD ONE AMERICA

Highlighting Promising Practices. One of the critical elements of the Race Initiative is identifying and highlighting
local and national efforts to promote racial reconciliation. The Race Initiative is compiling an extensive listing of
"promising practices," which are working to bring people together as one America. To date, 150 such promising
practices have been identified, and the list continues to grow.

Making Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday A "Day On" Instead of A "Day Off" In 1994, President Clinton signed into
law the King Holiday and Service Act making the national holiday a day of service that would bring people together,
promote racial cooperation and help to solve problems through citizen action. This year the Corporation for
National Service provided $225,000 in grants to 73 sites across the nation to help spur service projects on MLK Day.
  On January 19, in honor of Martin Luther King Day, President Clinton helped paint classrooms at Cardow High
School in Washington, D.C. Vice President Gore addressed the congregation at Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta,
Georgia. The First Lady read to children in Washington, D.C. Also, 12 Cabinet Secretaries, agency
administrators, members of the Race Initiative's Advisory Board, and other White House and Administration staff
joined in celebrating Dr. King's birthday by participating in community service events.

First Lady Highlights Boston ''Team Harmony" Promising Practice. To highlight successful community efforts, Mrs.
Clinton joined forces with the Boston-based Team Harmony Foundation to talk with high school students in Boston
and Washington, D.C., about ways to prevent prejudice. More than 8000 Boston youth participated in Mrs.
Clinton's visit, and over 2,000 young people attended the Washington, D.C. event. As a result of the First Lady's
events, Team Harmony has had requests to expand its program to New York, Chicago, Atlanta and Los Angeles.




                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
RECRUITING LEADERS TO HELP BUILD ONE AMERICA

Calling On WaD Street To Invest In Untapped Potential Of Our Diversity. On January 15, 1998, President Clinton
joined Reverend Jesse L. Jackson for the "Wall Street Project" conference at the World Trade Center in New,York
City. The President told business executives that Wall Street must "draw on the talent and diversity of all our
people in communities long bypassed by capital but full of potentia!." Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin, Federal
Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt Jr. also
participated in the event.

Mobilizing Business Leaders. On April 2, 1998, Vice President Gore announced a series of business roundtable
discussions, during an appearance on Black Entertainment Television(BET}. This series will be chaired by the Vice
President and will consist of four meetings with business leaders to discuss issues involving minorities and the
business world.

Holding Corporate Forums Across the Country. Hundreds of corporate leaders have participated in corporate forums
organized by the Initiative, in conjunction with members of the President's Cabinet. These forums have taken place
across the country -- from Florida to Arizona to California.

Partnering With Universities. The American Council on Education (ACE) and the Association of American Colleges
and Universities (AACU) have teamed up with the Race Initiative'to encourage colleges and universities to conduct
special programs focusing on race and diversity in American society. The combined membership of ACE and
AACU includes approximately 2000 colleges and universities, more than half of the accredited, degree-granting
institutions in America.

Reaching Out To Religious Leaders. The Advisory Board has joined with the religious community to organize the
national faith community, which has so often been at the forefront of this issue. The Initiative has sponsored forums
 in New Orleans and Louisville, Kentucky, for hundreds of religious leaders.

Outreach to the American Indians. In meetings in Washington, D.C., and around the country, Tribal leaders have
offered their advice and recommendations about the unique challenges American Indians face in building one
America. The Initiative is identifying Tribal leaders who are working in their own communities to respond to these
challenges.

Public Service Announcement Released. On December 2, 1997, the President's Initiative on Race released a public
service announcement developed in conjunction with the Leadership Conference on Education Fund and the Ad
Council. The PSA challenges youth to become more active in fighting racism and prejudice. It also encourages
them to tell President Clinton what they are doing to improve race relations in America.

CaD To Action To Young Leaders. On November 28, 1997, the President sent a letter to 25,000 high school senior
class presidents, college and university class presidents, and other young leaders from national and local organizations.
  In the letter, President Clinton issued a call to action by requesting young people commit to participate in at least
one project aimed at moving our country closer together. Hundreds of youth leaders from across the country have
responded to the President's call. Many of these youth activities are being highlighted as promising practices on the
One America Website at http://www.whitehouse.gov/initiatives/oneamerica.

Vice President Briefing With Youth Media.    On December 1, 1997, the Vice President hosted a briefing at the White
House for youth-oriented and specialty media, such as Vibe Magazine, MTVand Univision. At the briefing, the
Vice President spoke about the Race Initiative's emphasis on youth, and he called on the media representatives to find
ways to use their creative energies to reach young people on the subject of race.

                                    (Accomplishments Document as of April 2, 2010)


                                                                                                                        8


