RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-JUN-1998 20:21:49.00

SUBJECT:   kerrymania

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Boston Globe's McGrory reports, Sen. John Kerry (D-MA) , "in a dramatic
break"
            from Dem "dogma, plans to propose" 6/16 "gutting the seniority
systems that protect
           worn-out and unqualified teachers in many of the nation's
public schools, and instead
           providing principles and superintendents greater powers to hire
and fire at will." In a
            "lengthy speech intended to serve as a partial foundation to
build a presidential
           campaign," Kerry "will also propose dismantling" a teacher
certification process "that he
           said would prevent historian Doris Kearns Goodwin from teaching
high school history
           because she does not have a master's degree in education."
Kerry "crosses traditional
           party lines with abandon -- embracing many traditional" GOP
"themes while distancing
           himself in tone and substance from teachers unions, a powerful
bastion" of Dem support.
            "Aides said ... he has spent months pondering the elements of t
he speech as he tries to
           strengthen his standing on education issues in anticipation. of
a national campaign."



           No To School Vouchers, Yes To Public School Choice
                  From the draft of Kerry's speech: "No one can convince me
that a country that puts
           a man on the moon or balances the budget or pushes its .stock
market over 9,000 cannot
           put a good teacher in every classroom, a discipline. code for
every school community and
           a curriculum in every district that challenges our children to
reach higher and higher.
           Shame on us all for giving up on the vast majority of our
children before we've even
           joined the real fight." Ultimately, Kerry "said all parents
should be given a choice of
           sending their children to any public school, though he stopped
short of endorsing school
           vouchers." Kerry "will argue that vouchers do not.aid enough
children and divert attention
           from what he sees as the real problem: to fix public schools":
"It is time we end the
           system that condemns each child to an administrator's choice
and not a parent's choice,


           where possible. Public school choice -- nor private vouchers --
is also quite simply and
           quite realistically a practical necessity, even inevitability,
because no one pretends there
           will ever be enough commitment or money to build an alternative
system for everyone"
           (6/16).   (Back to Contents)
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 032 - FOLDER -007


[06/16/1998]


