RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eli G. Attie ( CN=Eli G. Attie/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUN-1998 19:42:47.00

SUBJECT:   Latest draft of VP's CNP speech for tomorrow (Thursday) at noon

TO: Gene B. Sperling   CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 }
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jake Siewert ( CN=Jake Siewert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael D. McCurry ( CN=Michael D. MCCurry/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rahm I. Emanuel ( CN=Rahrn I. Emanuel/OU=WHO/O=EOP @EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ron Klain ( CN=Ron Klain/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lawrence J. Stein ( CN=Lawrence J. Stein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Douglas B. Sosnik ( CN=Douglas B. Sosnik/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John Podesta ( CN=John Podesta/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Ruby Shamir ( CN=Ruby Shamir/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sara M. Latham ( CN=Sara M. Latham/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Peter A. Weissman ( CN=Peter A. Weissman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Darby E. Stott ( CN=Darby E. Stott/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Eleanor S. Parker ( CN=Eleanor S. Parker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
draft 6/17 7:30pm
REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE
CENTER FOR NATIONAL POLICY
Thursday, June 18, 1998

        You know, IO,ve been getting a lot of grief because earlier in the
week, after staying up very late to watch the Bulls-Jazz game and all the
post-game coverage, I inadvertently confused the name Michael Jordan with
Michael Jackson.  I donO,t know how I could have done that.  In fact, just
this morning, I was talking with your President, George Steinbrenner ...

        Thank you for having me here today, to talk about a subject that
is vital to any policy debate: how we keep our economy growing, and create
more jobs and opportunities for the American people.

        Nearly one year ago, I came before the Center for National Policy
to make a simple case: that the new economic strategy Presiden't Clinton
and I have pursued since 1993 was not only working, but that it
represented something new in economic policy, and something new in our
history; that it was helping to create a new economy -- but that we faced
stiff challenges to that strategy, on every major front.

        Back then, we were still fighting to balance the federal budget.
We were still fighting for the strategic investments in training, in
education, in technology and the environment that are so critical to
growth.  We were still fighting for American leadership and engagement in
the world.

        But above all, we were fighting those in the other party who
simply refused to abandon the out-of-date dogmas of the past -- those who
believed that the politics of raw ideology should take precedence over the
policies that actually build and sustain prosperity.

        We won those fights.  In 1993, without a single Republican vote we
enacted the new economic plan that virtually eliminated the budget
deficit, and produced what many are now calling the strongest economy in
our history. That laid the groundwork for the bipartisan balanced budget
that helped us finish the job, and helped to keep our economy growing.

         If there were any doubts then about the wisdom of our economic
course, there should be none today.    In the past 5 « years, our economy
has significantly raised standards of living and added more than 16
million new jobs. We have the fastest real wage growth in 25 years, the
lowest unemployment in 28 years, the smallest national government in 35
years, the highest rate of small business formation in history, and the
highest rate of private home ownership in history -- all with the lowest
inflation in 32 years. No wonder the Chairman of the Federal Reserve
called todayO,s economic performance O&as impressive as any I have
witnessed in my near half-century of daily observation of the American
economy ... it is possible that we have, in a sense, moved O+beyond
history.O,08



        Actually, you could call it the law of intended consequences. We
worked hard for these results.  Of course, government didnO,t create all
those new jobs and opportunities -- the American people did.  But
government helped lay the foundation.  Ours was a three-part strategy,
merging elements that had never been combined before: strict fiscal
discipline, strategic investments in the future, and international
engagement. And at the heart of the governmentO,s efforts was a new way
of thinking.  From our first day in office, we said: letD,s abandon the
failed orthodoxies of the past, and build our economic strength on what
actually works.

        5 « years ago, you couldnO,t have described that as a traditional
Democratic strategy, and certainly not a Republican strategy. But it has
been a winning strategy.  It has not only changed the political debate, it
has changed America for the better.

        Today, once again, our progress is threatened.  Despite all the
evidence that our economic strategy is working, some in the Congressional
majority are determined to work against it. They would unravel our fiscal
discipline -- even at the risk of raising interest rates, shattering
confidence in our economy, and squandering the resources we need to
finally close the generational deficit.  They would squeeze down on our
strategic investments in job training and education, and research and
development. They would widen the opportunity gap instead of closing it,
denying us the highly-skilled workforce we need for the 21st Century.
Some would even compromise our leadership in the world -- holding hostage
our ability to stabilize the world economy, and defend our economic and
security interests abroad.

        Worst of all, I fear that for some in the Congressional majority,
they have become so blinded by politics that their primary goal has become
not economic progress, but partisan conflict.

        So I come here today to issue a warning: if we allow risky,
partisan schemes to disrupt American economic policy, we could jeopardize
our economic recovery. We could lose our best chance to shape the 21st
Century into the most prosperous and productive time the world has ever
known.

        First, let us remember how far we have already come. When
President Clinton and I took office, AmericaO,s economy was reeling from
years of flabby budgets, phony numbers, and flimsy investments.    From
1981 to 1987, when the other party held both the White House and the
Senate, they put in place the most reckless economic plan our nation has
ever seen: irresponsible tax schemes, made-up numbers, and massive
deficits.   I know itO,s hard to imagine it today, but they actually
quadrupled AmericaO,s national debt in less than 12 years -- an act of
breathtaking contempt for future generations.

        The result was a vicious cycle, with faltering growth leading to
bigger deficits, and bigger deficits causing higher interest rates --
crowding out the private investment that is the real engine of growth and
jobs. By the early 90's, we had deficits at record levels, $300 billion a
year, stretching out as far as the eye could see. Every time businesses
felt a little strength in the economy and borrowed money to invest and
expand, the combination of their borrowing and the governmentO,s deficit
financing would put pressure on interest rates and the recovery would
stall.


        For years, Americans heard there were only two choices: tax and
spend, or cut and run. We knew there was a third way: invest and grow.
As I said last month in Detroit, we replaced the vicious cycle with a
virtuous cycle -- lower interest rates, more investment, more jobs, more
growth -- which then fueled even greater investment in our future.  And
this is about more than spreadsheets and statistics -- itO,s about
providing the opportunity that has always been the heart of the American
dream.  ItO,s about giving every child a chance at a better, brighter
future.

        That is why, at every step of the way, we tried to reach across
party lines -- to build what should have been a new bipartisan consensus
on economic policy.  It didnO,t quite work out that way -- and not just in
1993.  In 1995 and 0+96, the other party shut down the government rather
than agree to the strategic investments we believed our economy demanded.
Chastened by the outrage of the American people, the Republican leaders
were forced to accept President ClintonO,s priorities.  Still, in 1997, it
took months of intense negotiations to produce a bipartisan agreement
based on those priorities to finally balance the federal budget. And it
saddens me to say that we are seeing that partisanship again, on three
major fronts:

        First, there are some in the Congress who would risk our economy by
allowing the first balanced budget in a generation to become our last
balanced budget.

        By trying to use the budget surplus before it even rolls in -- and
by recklessly proposing the elimination of the entire tax code, with no
way to replace it -- they would jeopardize everything we have fought for
these past 5 « years: low interest rates, and a stable climate for
investment. Our chance to tackle tough, long-term challenges like saving
Social Security and Medicare. And the confidence of world financial
markets, which could be damaged even before these risky plans come up for
a vote -- simply because of the prospect of new deficits.

        Our economic power comes from a vote of confidence in America, a
vote cast in markets around the world that evaluate every governmentO,s
policies every day, through billions of transactions.  TodayO,s economy
operates on the information standard, not the gold standard.  If investors
think youO,re playing fiscal games, interest rates climb almost instantly.

        That is why, barring an economic reversal, a national emergency,
or a foreign crisis, I believe we should balance the budget this year,
next year, and every year. Not through a Constitutional Amendment that
would clog up the courts -- that was always just a cop-out for those who
couldnO,t make the hard decisions to do it the right way -- but through
the resolve of our national leaders.

        Without that fiscal discipline, we will never cross the next great
budgetary frontier -- saving Social Security for our children.  So when
President Clinton saw that we would have the first budget surplus in 30
years, he challenged leaders of both parties to reserve every penny of any
surplus until we save Social Security first.

        At first Congressiorial leaders embraced that pledge. And anyone
who doubts the commitment of our own party to fiscal discipline and
serious entitlement reform should note this fact: today, many of the most
progressive Democrats have signed on to save Social Security first.

        But in the Congressional majority, some have tried to back away


proposing that the surplus be squandered on large, risky, and
indiscriminate tax schemes, with no regard for our long-term fiscal
future.

        Last October, in testimony before the House Budget Committee,
Speaker Gingrich was practically licking his chops over the first hint of
a surplus -- proposing that it be used for everything from military
projects and highways, reducing the debt, and a large tax cut to boot.
Then, this April, before the .House Ways and Means Committee, he announced
that heD,d seen the light, and said D&I support the PresidentD,s call to
use every penny of the surplus to save Social Security.DS

        The attacks came pretty quickly from within the GOP; one prominent
Republican accused some in his party of D&hiding behind a D+wait-and-seeD,
postureDS rather than calling for more tax cuts. And just two days later,
in early May, the Speaker couldnD,t take the pressure from his right-wing
anymore, so he changed his mind and said he wanted to go back to using
half the surplus for tax cuts.  Barely two weeks after that, the Speaker
supported the PresidentD,s pledge again.   But two nights ago, at a
Republican fundraiser, he went back again to the tax cut scheme. We need
an unbreakable commitment to save Social Security first -- not every other
day, but every day.

        Ways and Means Chairman Bill ArcherD,s position has been more
consistent. He has said all along that a large part of the surplus should
be spent on tax cuts, because D&the surplus is surging out of control.DS
Think about that: a surplus thatD,s D&out of control.DS At least thatD,s
better than a Congressional majority thatD,s out of control.

        I recognize that it is easy -- sometimes irresistible -- to
squander every penny the moment it becomes available.  Some would say
itO,s good politics.  But it is dangerous fiscal policy.  WeD,ve solved
the budget deficit, but closing the generational deficit will take even
greater fiscal resolve.

        Yesterday, in what may be the riskiest, most reckless act of
economic· policy ever envisioned, the Republican House voted to abolish the
entire tax code, with no way to replace it.   It was a vote to cut college
scholarships, child care, and health care for millions who receive
assistance through the tax code.   It was a vote to raise the cost of home
mortgages for struggling young families.   It was a vote to make it
impossible for any family or business to invest in the future with
certainty or stability.

        That may be why the non-partisan Tax Executive Institute said
scrapping the cod.e DBillustrate [s] the folly of making tax policy by sound
bite and should be rejected.DB

        The Washington Post called it D&a way to posture on the cheap in an
election year ... TheyD,ve stopped producing bills in favor of producing
bumper stickers.DB

        The Chief Economist of the Chamber of Commerce calls the idea
D&more than a little dangerous.DB And now the National Association of
Manufacturers is against it, too.

        No wonder business thinks this idea is nutty -- because
predictability and stability are essential for business planning.  But
then, stability is not a prized principle in todayD,s Republican Party
politics.



        Let me be clear: we support tax reform -- which is why we have
proposed the most sweeping set of IRS reforms and taxpayer rights since
the tax code was first enacted. We support tax cuts -- tax cuts that are
carefully targeted and fully paid for.  Both of our major deficit
reduction plans -- in 1993 and in 1997 -- contained targeted tax cuts.
Today, taxes for middle-income families are the lowest they have been in
two decades.  But we do not support tax reform by wrecking ball. And we
do not support using the budget surplus as a Congressional candy jar,
which would only revive the runaway deficits of the past, and endanger the
recovery we have worked so hard to sustain.

        Let us join together, across party lines, to save Social Security
first -- and letO,s keep that commitment until the problem is solved.

        Our economy faces a second threat. There are some in the Congress who
would cut the strategic investments that give us faster growth and
safeguard our prosperity for the 21st Century.

        Through lean fiscal management -- and because of our efforts to
reinvent government, eliminating more than 200 outdated programs, reducing
the federal workforce by more than 330,000, and saving $137 billion --
President Clinton has proven that we can balance the budget and invest in
the future at the same time. And I believe there are three kinds of
priority investments for our future: investments in people; investments in
places; and investments in productivity.

        Especially in this New Economy and Information Age -- fueled by
innovation, driven by new technology, shaped increasingly by minds and not
just by matter -- we need an aggressive commitment to invest in our
people. That starts with education and job training -- for the
highly-skilled workforce that is already in short supply. According to
one recent survey, over 60% of corporate leaders say that the number-one
barrier to sustained economic growth is the lack of skilled workforce.   We
must invest more in a world-class education for every American -- from
pre-school to college to job training and retraining.   It includes quality
health care, and a Patients Bill of Rights -- because a healthy workforce
is a productive workforce.  It includes measures to strengthen families,
because thatO,s where people find fulfillment and healing.

        We must invest in the places where families live -- our cities,
towns, and communities -- to make them safe, clean, sustainable places for
economic growth. That means aggressive action to clean up our
environment, and protect our precious open spaces.  It means more police
and safer streets.  It means empowering communities, especially our
poorest areas -- because we know they have the most untapped potential.
It means metropolitan strategies for development -- encouraging regions to
work together to create jobs, clean our environment, and prevent urban and
suburban sprawl.

        And we must make investments in productivity, by funding
cutting-edge research and technology, to fuel innovation and expand
electronic commerce. That is why we are investing in 21st Century
scientific research, and in the Next Generation of the Internet, moving at
speeds 1,000 times faster than today.

        Last year, we struck a bipartisan agreement for strategic
investments in AmericaO,s future.  But the budget resolution that has now
passed the House breaks the spirit of that agreement.  It would mean
severe and unnecessary cuts in areas that are essential to our.economic


future.

        It could force deep cuts in job training and college
scholarships.  It could threaten Medicare and Medicaid, and even food
safety. It could cut child care, and critical efforts to move people from
welfare to work.  It would cut efforts to ensure clean water and delay the
clean-up of dangerous toxic waste sites.   It could completely eliminate
our 21st Century Research Fund, to invest in path-breaking scientific
inquiry and new technology.  It could even cut our efforts to put 100,000
police on the streets, all across America.

        We dono,t know the full details of this smoke-and-mirrors budget;
its savings and cuts are so vague, the New York Times concluded that it
o&fails the basic integrity test.oB But here is what we know to be true:
a budget scheme that cuts training and education means we will not have
the skilled workforce we need for the 21st Century. A budget scheme that
cuts police and the environment means we will not have safe, clean
communities to attract new investment and jobs.

        Dono,t take it from me.  One respected budget expert went so far
as to say that the House Republican budget is o&just a mockery.oB That
was Senator Pete Domenici, Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee.  I
would guess that quite a few Republicans share that view.

        There is another investment -- on~ that is especially important to
me, and to our childreno,s future -- that has fallen victim to partisan
politics. And that is the fight against youth smoking. When the Senate
Commerce Committee, the very committee on which I used to serve,
considered this 'issue, an overwhelming bipartisan majority -- nineteen to
one -- voted for a comprehensive bill to dramatically reduce youth
smoking, save lives, and save our economy tens of. billions of dollars.
Then something happened: the mighty tobacco industry decided to kill it.
Thato,s when the partisan parlor games began.

        The Republicans said they wanted a tax cut in the bill -- so a tax
cut was included. They said the bill spent too much on social programs
so the spending was cut.  They said the lawyerso, fees were too high -- so
the fees were cut.

        For too many Republicans, those complaints were nothing but a
smokescreen. Even with all those changes, last night the Republican
Senate tried to kill the tobacco bill. Of course, 14 courageous
Republicans joined 43 of the 45 Senate Democrats in supporting the bill.
But that was still three shy of the 60 we needed to move the bill along.
America needs a comprehensive, bipartisan bill to reduce youth smoking.
ItO,s time to stop playing politics with American lives.

        There is another reason why we must support all these strategic
investments in our future.  Only by making our economy work for everyone
-- only by sharing and extending prosperity here at home -- can we build
and sustain a consensus for open markets, for international engagement,
and for aggressive leadership in the world.

        There are some in the Congressional majority who would risk our economy
by shutting out t~e world, instead of leading and engaging it.

        Above all issues, American leadership used to be the greatest
bipartisan preserve. Today, a dangerous and growing isolationism -- a
willingness to play politics at home with our interests around the world
-- could push our prosperity over the edge.  It is an abandonment of a


great and longstanding internationalist tradition in the other party.     And
it is one of the single greatest threats to our continued economic
strength.

        We have seen this Congress drag its feet on IMF funding, while the
Asian financial crisis deepens, affecting not only the markets of Europe,
but also our own.

        We have seen this Congress withhold our dues to the United Nations
in order to play politics with a womanO,s right to choose.  In the
process, they are jeopardizing our progress in reforming the U.N., and
potentially costing us our vote in the U.N. General Assembly at the end of
this year.

        Is that any way to honor the legacy of internationalism left by
President Eisenhower, President Nixon, and President Bush?

          We have had some open and honorable disagreements within the
.Democratic Party on the subject of international trade -- and we have
 agreed to disagree.   But most do agree that with one-third of our growth
 tied to exports in the past five years, we must move forward in opening
 markets.   In the past few months alone, we launched a new trade
partnership with the European Union, and new trade talks with Latin
America. A major agreement to keep global electronic commerce duty-free.
A landmark international anti-corruption convention. And as you know, I
believe we must do still more to open up markets.

        We also believe, as the President told the World Trade
Organization last month, that competition among nations must never become
a race to the bottom -- in environmental protections, consumer
protections, or labor standards. Our goal must be to help more people
benefit from the enormous possibilities of the global economy.

        But our entire party can agree on this: if we shut ourselves off
from the world; if we give up our seat at the table of world affairs; if
we walk away from the most urgent financial crises for the sake of
politics, our own economy and our own workers will suffer. And we will
lose the leverage to fight for freedom -- freely-elected governments, the
free flow of ideas, the free movement of products and people -- which is
the surest route to prosperity both at home and around ·the world.

        Consider the IMF.  One look at this morningD,s trade numbers shows
why the Congressional majority is wrong to undermine it. When Asian
economies are hurt -- when foreign customers canO,t buy our products
when foreign currencies lose their value, and our competitors try to flood
the marketplace with cheap, devalued goods -- we are the ones that are
hurt. We need the IMF to work with countries that are at risk, before the
risk spreads to us.  The IMF needs reform of its own. But to cut off IMF
support now is like shutting down the Fire Department when the house next
door is on fire.

        It is one of the great and tragic ironies of our history that we
are sometimes prone to turn inward when our power is greatest, when our
economy is strongest, when our interests are most secure.  That is why it
is so wrong for Republicans to retreat into isolationism at the very brink
of a new American century -- and that is why we are grateful to those
brave few in the other party who are fighting for the IMF, and for paying
our dues to the U.N., and for engagement in the world.  Today, our ability
to lead and shape the world economy is. at its peak. We waste that power
at our own peril.



          Taken together, the postures and positions taken by this
  Congressional majority are as astonishing as they are irresponsible:
  sunsetting the tax code and squandering the surplus.  Squeezing down on
  the education and training our workers and businesses need.  Blocking our
  efforts to stabilize the global financial markets that are essential to
  our economy. The Republican Party of 1998 has achieved the remarkable
  feat of being simultaneously anti-labor and anti-business.

          For 5 « years, President Clinton and I   have sought to build a new
  economic consensus in this country -- one that   reaches beyond the false
  choices and rigid politics of the past. After    so much success, why would
  we go back to failed old economic dogmas? Why    would we unravel the
  strategy we worked so hard to build?

          I am still hopeful that we can forge a bipartisan solution to our
  economic challenges, and put prosperity before partisanship, once and for
  all.  I am still hopeful that we can appeal to the great, lost traditions
  of the other party -- of economic growth, of fiscal discipline, of
  international leadership. But with jobs and incomes at stake, hope is not
  enough. The American people must be on notice.   It is, after all,- their
  economy. After sixteen million new jobs, and year after year of unbroken
  economic growth, we owe it to them to keep it strong.  Thank you.


