RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen G. Elmore ( CN=Stephen G. Elmore/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:lB-JUN-l998 16:55:50.00

SUBJECT:   Yesterday's Mark-up of S2176: Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998

TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deborah@6=Clifton@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deb
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James J. Jukes ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James C. Murr ( CN=James C. Murr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert N. Weiner ( CN=Robert N. Weiner/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William P. Marshall ( CN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan D. Breul ( CN=Jonathan D. Breul/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: David ~. Haun ( CN=David J. Haun/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa B. Fairhall ( CN=Lisa B. Fairhall/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: ?la@opm.gov      ola@opm.gov @ inet   [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ingrid M. Schroeder ( CN=Ingrid M. Schroeder/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: G. Timothy Saunders ( CN=G. Timothy Saunders/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Roger S. Ballentine ( CN=Roger S. ·Ballentine/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )


READ: UNKNOwN

TO: Dorian V. Weaver ( CN=Dorian V. Weaver/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Steven D. Aitken ( CN=Steven D. Aitken/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James Boden ( CN=James Boden/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Raymond P. Kogut ( CN=Raymond P. Kogut/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jill M. Blickstein ( CN=Jill M. Blickstein/OU=OMB/o=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
THIS LRM IS PROVIDED ONLY FOR YOUR INFORMATION.    YOU DO NOT NEED TO
PROVIDE COMMENTS TO OMB/LRD.

You will not receive a paper copy of this LRM.

LRM ID: SGE141
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Thursday, June 18, 1998

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                       Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Stephen G. Elmore
                                PHONE: (202) 395-3924 FAX: (202) 395-6148
SUBJECT:        Yesterday's Mark-up of S2176:   Federal Vacancies Reform
Act of 1998

DEADLINE:                 NOT APPLICABLE

In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: **FOR YOUR INFORMATION**

Attached is the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, as introduced by
Sen. Thompson (R-TN) on Tuesday, along with Thompson's and Thurmond's
statements of introduction from the 06/16/98 Congressional Record. We
understand that the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee adopted the
following amendments (not included in the attached bill text) yesterday:

1. Levin (D-MI) amendment to extend the time a new administration could
take to submit nominations from 180 (as introduced) to 240 days (approved
by voice vote). Under current law, a new administration has 120 days to


submit nominations for vacant positions from the day the new president is
sworn in.

2.    ~lenn (D-OH) and Levin (D-MI) technical amendments -- as   ye~   unknown
     also were approved by voice vote.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
61-JUSTICE - L. Anthony Sutin - (202) 514-2141
92-0ffice of Personnel Management - Harry Wolf -   (202) 606-1424

EOP:
Jill M. Blickstein
Lisa B. Fairhall
Raymond P. Kogut
David J. Haun
James Boden
Robert G. Damus
Steven D. Aitken
Jonathan D. Breul
Dorian V. Weaver
William P. Marshall
Roger S. Ballentine
Tracey E. Thornton
Timothy G. Saunders
Robert N. Weiner
Jose Cerda III
Julie A. Ferriandes.
Elena Kagan
James C. Murr
Janet R. Forsgren
James J. Jukes
Ingrid M. Schroeder


Excerpt from Congressional Record, 06/16/98, beginning pg. S6413
(Scroll down for bill text prior to yesterday's mark-up.):

By Mr. THOMPSON (for himself, Mr. Byrd, Mr. Thurmond, Mr. Lott, and Mr.
Roth) :

S. 2176. A bill to amend sections 3345 through 3349 of title 5, United
States Code (commonly
referred to as the 'Vacancies Act' to clarify statutory requirements
relating to vacancies in and
appointments to certain Federal offices, and for other purposes; .to the
Committee on Governmental
Affairs.

FEDERAL VACANCIES REFORM ACT OF 1998

Mr. THOMPSON.

Mr. President, on behalf of myself and a bipartisan group of senators, I
introduce today the Federal
Vacancies Reform Act of 1998. This legislation is needed to preserve one
of the Senate's most
important powers: the duty to advise and consent on presidential nominees.


The Framers of the Constitution established a procedure for the
appointment of all government
officers: they were to be nominated by the President and confirmed by the
"Senate, unless Congress
decided that the appointment of specified inferior officers was to be made
by the President alone, the
courts, or by department heads. The First Congress, however, recognized
that vacancies would arise
in executive positions, and enacted legislation providing for officials to
temporarily exercise the
powers of an office even without Senate confirmation. The law was adopted
essentially in its current
form in 1868, and was last amended in 1988. As amended, the first
assistant or another
Senate-confirmed individual can serve for 120 days after the vacancy, and,
in addition, may serve
beyond those 120 days if the President submits a nomination for that
office to the Senate within those
120 days.

Unfortunately, the Vacancies Act is honored more in the breach than in the
observance. For the, past
25 years, administrations of both parties have claimed that the Justice
Department is exempt from the
Vacancies Act. And since the Reagan Administration, other departments, at
the behest of the Justice
Department, make the same argument, purportedly based on the authority of
the heads of each of the
executive departments to delegate their authority to other department
personnel. Following this
argument to its logical end, none of the departments is bound by the
Vacancies Act, so that the act is
a dead letter.

Certainly, this Administration has conducted itself as if the Vacancies
Act applies to none of the
departments. Each department has at least one temporary officer who has
served more than 120
days before any nomination was sent to the Senate. Of the 320 executive
department advise and
consent positions, 64 are held by temporary officials. Of the 64, 43 have
served longer than 120
days before any nomination was submitted to the Congress. The Commerce
Department is the worst
offender in number and in degree. For instance, the acting head of the
Census Bureau is neither the
first assistant nor a person who has been confirmed by the Senate, a
mind-boggling violation of the
law. Nor has a nomination been made, although the prior Census chief
announced her departure
more than five months ago.

The government's important functions should be carried out by permanent
officials. That means that
the President must submit nominations and the Senate needs to provide its
advice and consent. This
administration seems not to want to subject its appointees to such
scrutiny. Acting on that desire is
unconstitutional and a violation of the Vacancies Act as well. The
Appointments Clause is not a


technical nicety. As the Supreme Court has stated, the Appointments Clause
is designed to keep the
Executive and Legislative Branches within their appropriate spheres, so as
to better preserve
individual liberty.

The Governmenta'l Affairs Committee recently held an oversight hearing on
the Vacancies Act. In that
hearing, it became apparent that the Administration was regularly acting
in violation of the law, but
faced no consequence for its actions. The Committee also heard testimony
from Senators Byrd and
Thurmond, who had each introduced bills designed to ensure compliance with
the Vacancies Act
through clarifying the scope of agencies covered and providing an
enforcement mechanism. Our·
colleagues owe a debt of gratitude to Senators Byrd and Thurmond for
raising these important
issues and offering solutions to address them.

I have found the approaches in the Byrd and Thurmond bills to have
contributed importantly to the
drafting of the legislation I introduce today. It is extremely important
to ensure that the Vacancy Act
period run from the date of the vacancy, to clarify that it covers all
departments, and to impose a
sanction for noncompliance. Subsequent to the introduction of the Byrd and
Thurmond bills, the
United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued
a decision on the meaning
of the Vacancies Act, approving the four year service of an acting head of
the Office of Thrift
Supervision as appointed by.the departing head of the agency. Overruling
several portions of that
decision have become a priority.

The legislation I introduce today provides that in the event of a vacancy
in a position in an executive
agency requiring the advice and consent of the Senate, the officer's first
assistant is allowed to
perform the functions and duties of the office on an acting basis, for up
to 150 days. Unaer current
law, the period is 120 days, but the vicissitudes of the modern vetting
process appear to require that
the time be lengthened, to my regret. Alternatively, the President may
direct another person who has
already received Senate confirmation to serve as the acting official for
150 days. To prevent these
restrictions from being gamed, the bill provides that the acting officer
must have been the first
assistant for 180 of the 365 days preceding the vacancy.

The length of temporary service can be extended beyond the 150 days if the
President submits a
nomination to the Senate for the vacant position. If the nomination is
withdrawn, or if the Senate
rejects or returns it, the acting official can serve only for 150 days
after that event.

The bill makes clear that the Vacancies Act applies to all offices in


executive agencies for which
appointment is required to be made by the President by and with the advice
and consent of

the President. Nonetheless, we do not write on a clean slate. There are a
number of laws already on
the books that provide a process by which persons can serve as acting
officers when particular
offices are vacant. In most instances, these officials can serve until a
successor is confirmed, without
regard to the Vacancies Act. The bill preserves those specific statutes,
but, to clearly reject the
position of the Justice Department, it expressly repudiates the contention
that a law authorizing the
head of a department to delegate or reassign duties among other officers
is a statute that provides for
the temporary filling of a specific office. For the future, Congress will
have to expressly provide that it
is superseding the Vacancies Act if it wishes to override the.Vacancies
Act as to the temporary filling
of advise.and consent provisions.

The bill also establishes a second enforcement mechanism. If a nominee is
not submitted to the
Senate within 150 days of the vacancy, then the office is vacant until a
nominee is submitted. While
the routine functions of the office would be allowed to continue, those
functions and duties that are
specified to be performed by that official could only be performed by the
head of the department. In
fact, no specified duty of the officeholder that existed by regulation for
the 180 days preceding the
vacancy could be diminished in an effort to avoid the bill's vacant office
provisions. However, if the
President submits a nomination at any point after the 150 days, the acting
officer would again be
allowed to serve while the nomination was pending in the Senate, until
confirmation, or until 150 days
after the rejection, withdrawal, or return of the nomination. Actions
taken by any acting official in
violation of these provisions would be of no effect, and no one would be
permitted to ratify the
actions of the acting official that were taken in violation of the vacant
office provisions.

Enforcement is further enhanced by requiring each executive agency to
report to the Comptroller
General the existence of vacancies, the names of persons serving as acting
officers and when such
service began, the name of any nominee and when such nomination was
submitted to the Senate, and
the final disposition of the nomination. The Comptroller General will then
notify the Congress, the
President, and the Office of Personnel Management when the 150 day
limitations have been reached.

Mr. President, the Framers established a system for' appointing important
officials in which the
President and the Senate would each playa role. Not only did the Framers
wish to ensure that more


than one person's wisdom was brought to the appointment process, but that
the President, in
selecting nominees, would be aware that they would face scrutiny. When a
vacancy occurs in such an
office, it is important to establish a process that permits the routine
operation of the government to
continue, but that will not allow the evasion of the Senate's
constitutional authority to advise and
consent to nominations. I am pleased that a number of my colleagues are
joining with me to formulate        .
a structure that will achieve these ends. I look forward to the Senate's
passage of this legislation in the
near future.

I ask unanimous consent that the bill be printed in the Record.

There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the
Record, as follows:

                                 [Page: S6414]

                                   S. 2176

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in
Congress assembled,

SECTION 1 .. SHORT TITLE.
This Act· may be cited as the 'Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998'.

SEC. 2. FEDERAL VACANCIES AND APPOINTMENTS.
(a) In General: Chapter 33 of title 5, United States Code,   is amended by
striking sections 3345
th~ough 3349 and inserting the following:


'3345. Acting officer
'(a) If an officer of an Executive agency (including the Executive Office
of the President, and other
than the General Accounting Office) whose appointment to office is
required to be made by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, dies,
resigns, or is otherwise unable to
perform the functions and duties of the office--

'(1) the first assistant of such officer shall perform the functions and
duties of the office temporarily in
an acting capacity, subject to the time limitations of section 3346; or

'(2) notwithstanding paragraph (1), the President (and only the President)
may direct a person who
serves in an office for which appointment is required to be made by the
President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, to perform the functions and duties of
the office temporarily in an
acting capacity, subject to the time limitations of section 3346.
'(b) Notwithstanding section 3346(a) (2), a person may not serve as an
acting officer for an office
under this section, if--

'(1) on the date of the death, resignation, or beginning of inability to


 serve of the applicable officer,
 such person serves in the position of first assistant to such officer;

  -(2) during the 365-day period preceding such date, such person served in
  the position of first
. assistant to such officer for less than 180 days; and

-(3) the President submits a nomination of such person to the Senate for
appointment to such office.
-(c) with respect to the office of the Attorney General of the United
States, the provisions of section
508 of title 28 shall be applicable.

                                 [Page: S6415]

 -3346. Time limitation
 -(a) The person serving as an acting officer as described under section
 3345 may serve in the office--

-(1) for no longer than 150 days beginning on the date the vacancy occurs;
or

-(2) subject to subsection (b), once a first or second nomination for the
office is submitted to the
Senate, for the period that the nomination is pending in the Senate.
-(b) (1) If the first nomination for the office is rejected by the Senate,
withdrawn, or returned to the
President by the Senate, the person may continue to serve as the acting
officer for no more than 150
days after the date of such rejection, withdrawal, or return.
-(2) If a second nomination for the office (of a different person than fi
rst nominated in the case of a
rejection or withdrawal) is submitted to the Senate during the ISO-day
period after the rejection,
withdrawal, or return of the first nomination, the person serving as the
acting officer may continue to
serve--

 -(A) until the second nomination is confirmed; or

-(B) for no more than 150 days after the second nomination is rejected,
withdrawn, or returned.
-(c) If a person begins serving as an acting officer during an adjournment
of the Congress sine die, the
ISO-day period under subsection (a) shall begin on the date that the
Senate first reconvenes.

-3347. Application
-(a) Sections 3345 and 3346 are applicable to any office of an Executive
agency (including the
Executive Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting
Office) for which
appointment is required to be made by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the
Senate, unless--

-(1) another statutory provision ixpressly provides that such provision
supersedes sections 3345 and
3346;


'(2) a statutory provision in effect on the date of enactment of the
Federal Vacancies Reform Act of
1998 expressly authorizes the President, or the head of an Executive
department, to designate an
officer to perform the functions and duties of a specified office
temporarily in an acting capacity; or

'(3) the President makes an appointment to fill a vacancy in such office
during the recess of the
Senate pursuant to clause 3 of section 2 of article II of the United
States Constitution.
'(b) Any statutory provision providing general authority to the head of an
Executive agency (including
the Executive Office of the President, and other than the General
Accounting Office) to delegate
duties to, or to reassign duties among, officers or employees of such
Executive agency, is not a
statutory provision to which subsection (a) (2) applies.

 '3348. Vacant office
 '(a) In this section--

'(I) the term 'action' includes any agency action as defined under section
551(13); and

'(2) the term 'function or duty' means any function or duty of the
applicable office that--

 '(A) (i) is established by statute; and

 '(ii) is required by statute to be performed by the applicable officer
 (and only that officer); or

 '(B) (i) (I) is established by regulation; and

'(II) is required by such regulation to be performed by the applicable
officer (and only that officer);
and

'(ii) includes a function or duty to which clause (i) (I) and (II)
applies, and the applicable regulation is
in effect at any time during the 180-day period preceding the date on
which the vacancy occurs,
notwithstanding any regulation that--

'(I) is issued on or after the date occurring 180 days before the date on
which the vacancy occurs;
and

'(II) limits any function or duty required to be performed by the
applicable officer (and only that
officer) .
'(b) Subject to section 3347 and subsection (c)--

'(I) if the President does not submit a first nomination to the Senate to
fill a vacant office within 150
days after the date on which a vacancy occurs--

'(A) the office shall remain vacant untii the President submits a first
nomination to the Senate; and



'(B) in the case of an office other than the office of the head of an
Executive agency (including the
Executive Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting
Office), only the head of
such Executive agency may perform any function or duty of such office,
until a nomination is made in
accordance with subparagraph (A);

'(2) if the President does not submit a second nomination to the Senate
within 150 days after the date
of the rejection, withdrawal, or return of the first nomination--

'(A) the office shall remain vacant until the President submits a second
nomination to the Senate; and

'(B) in the case of an office other than the office of the head of an
Executive agency (including the
Executive Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting
Office), only the head of
such Executive agency may perform any function or duty of such office,
until a nomination is made in
accordance with subparagraph (A); and

'(3) if an office is vacant after 150 days after the rejection,
withdrawal, or return of the second
nomination--

'(A) the office shall remain vacant untii a person is appointed by the
President, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate; and

'(B) in the case of an office other than the office of the head of an
Executive agency (including the
Executive Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting
Office), only the head of
such Executive agency may perform any function or duty of such office,
until an appointment is made
in accordance with subparagraph (A).
'(c) If the last day of any ISO-day period under subsection (b) is a day
on which the Senate is not in
session, the first day the Senate is next in session and receiving nom
inations shall be deemed to be the
last day of such period.
'(d) (1) Except as provided under paragraphs (1) (B), (2) (B), and (3) (B) of
subsection (b), an action
shall have no force or effect· if such action--

'(A) (i) is taken by any person who fills a vacancy in violation of
subsection (b); and

'(ii) is the performance of a function or duty of such vacant office; or

'(B) (i) is taken by a person who is not filling a vacant office; and

'(ii) is the performance of a function or duty of such vacant office.
'(2) An action that has no force or effect under paragraph (1) may not be
ratified.
'(d) This section shall not apply to--


. '(1) the General Counsel of the National Labor Relations Board;

 '(2) the General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority; or

 '(3) any Inspector General appointed by the President, by and with the
 advice and consent of the
 Senate.

'3349. Reporting of vacancies
'(a) The head of each Executive agency (including the Executive Office of
the President, and other
than the General Accounting Office) shall submit to the Comptroller
General of the United States and
to each House of Congress--

'(I) notification of a vacancy and the date such vacancy occurred
immediately upon the occurrence
of the vacancy;

 '(2) the name of any person serving in an acting capacity and the date
 such service began
 immediately upon the designation;

'(3) the name of any person nominated to the Senate to fill the vacancy
and the date such nomination
is submitted immediately upon the submission of the nomination; and

'(4) the date of a rejection, withdrawal, or return of any nomination
immediately upon such rejection,
withdrawal, or return.
'(b) If the Comptroller General of the United States makes a determination
that an officer is serving
longer than the ISO-day period including the applicable exceptions to such
period under section
3346, the Comptroller General shall report such determination to--

 '(1) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate;

'(2) the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight of the House of
Representatives;

'(3) the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and House of
Representatives;

'(4) the appropriate committees of jurisdiction of the Senate and House of
Representatives;

 '(S) the President; and

'(6) the Office of Personnel Management.

'3349a. Presidential inaugural transitions
'(a) In this section, the term 'transitional inauguration day' means the
date on which any person
swears or affirms the oath of office as President, if such person is not
the President on the date
preceding the date of swearing or affirming such oath of office.
'(b) With respect to any vacancy that exists during the 60-day period
beginning on a transitional
inauguration day, the 1S0-day period under section 3346 or 3348 shall be


 deemed to--

 -(1) begin on the later of--

 -(A) the date following such transitional inauguration day; or

 -(B) the date the vacancy occurs; and

 -(2) be a period of 180 days.

-3349b. Holdover provisions relating to certain independent establishments
-With respect to any independent establishment for which a single officer
is the head of the
establishment, sections 3345 through 3349a shall not be construed to
affect any statute that
authorizes a person to continue to serve in any office--

-(1) after the expiration of the term for which such person is appointed;
and

-(2) until a successor is appointed or a specified period of time has
expired.

 -3349c. Exclusion of certain officers
 -Sections 3345 through 3349b shall not apply to--

-(1) any member who is appointed by the President, by and with the advice
and consent of the
Senate to any board, commission, or similar entity that--

 -(A) is composed of multiple members; and

 -(B) governs an independent establishment or Government corporation; or

 -(2) any commissioner of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.   I.

 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment:

(1) Table of sections: The table of sections for chapter 33 of title 5,
United States Code, is
amended by striking the matter relating to subchapter III and inserting
the following:

-SUBCHAPTER III--DETAILS, VACANCIES, AND
APPOINTMENTS

-3341. Details; within Executive or military departments.

-[3342. Repealed.]

-3343. Details; to international organizations.

-3344. Details; administrative law judges.

-3345. Acting officer.

-3346. Time limitation.

-3347. Application.

-3348. Vacant office.



 '3349. Reporting of vacancies.

 '3349a. Presidential inaugural transitions.

'3349b. Holdover provisions relating to certain independent
establishments ."

 '3349c. Exclusion of certain officers. '.

(2) Subchapter heading: The subchapter heading for subchapter III of
chapter 33 of title 5, United
States Code, is amended to read as follows:

                                  [Page: S6416)

'SUBCHAPTER IIt--DETAILS, VACANCIES, AND
APPOINTMENTS' .

SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICATION.
(a) Effective Date: This Act and the amendments made by this Act shal"l
take effect on the date of
enactment of this Act.
(b) Application: This Act shall apply to any office that--

 (1) becomes vacant after the date of enactment of this Act; or

(2) is vacant on such date, except sections 3345 through 3349 of title 5,
United States Code (as
amended by this Act), shall apply as though such office first became
vacant on such date.




Mr. THURMOND. Mr. President, I rise today as an original cosponsor of the
Federal Vacancies
Reform Act. This legislation is essential to help preserve and strengthen
the advice and consent role
of the Senate as mandated in the Constitution.

One of the greatest fears of the Founders was the accumulation of too much
power in one source,
and the separation of powers among the three branches of Government is one
of the keys to the
success of our great democratic government. An excellent example of the
separation of powers is the
requirement in Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution that the
President receive the advice and
consent of the Senate for the appointment of officers of the United
States. As Chief Justice Rehnquist
wrote for the Supreme Court a few years ago, 'The Clause is a bulwark
against one branch
aggrandizing its power at the expense of another branch.'

The Vacancies Act is central to the Appointments Clause because it places
limits on the amount of
time that the President can appoint someone to an advice and consent
position in an acting capacity


without sending a nomination to the Senate. However, for many years, the
executive branch has
failed to comply with the letter of the law. The Vacancies Act has no
method of enforcement, so the
executive branch just ignores it. When confronted with the act, the
Attorney General makes very
weak legal arrangements about its inapplicability: This is what the
Attorney General did over one year
ago when I raised the Vacancies Act at an oversight hearing. At the time,
almost all of the top
positions at the Justice Department were being filled in an acting
capacity. I exchanged letters with
her about the Vacancies Act, and detailed the fallacy in her argument. It
was to no avail.

I became convinced that legislation to rewrite the vacancies law and
provide some remedy for
violating it was the only way to get the executive branch to properly
respect the advice and consent
role of the Senate. Senator Lott and I introduced legislation earlier this
year, and I testified about it
before the Governmental Affairs Committee.

I detailed for the Committee some prominent examples of how the Act was
being ignored. President
Clinton allowed the Criminal Division of the Justice Department to
languish for over two and one half
years before making an appointment. The Government had an Acting Solicitor
General for an entire
term of the Supreme Court. Most recently, the President installed an
Acting Chief of the Civil Rights
Division in blatant disregard of the Judiciary Committee's decision not to
support his controversial
choice.

However, let me be clear. This bill is not about anyone President or any
one nominee. It is about
preserving the institutional role of the Senate. A Republican President
has no more right to ignore the
appointments process than a Democrat President.

Today, Senator Thompson, Senator Byrd, Senator Lot, and I are introducing
a bipartisan bill to
address the problem. It gives the President 150 days to send a nomination
rather than the current
120 days. If he does not comply, the office must remain vacant and the
actions of any person acting
in that office after that time are null and void, until a nominee is
forwarded to the Senate. The bill also
clarifies the application of the Vacancies Act to reject the Attorney
General's flawed interpretation.

Mr. President, we must act to preserve the advice and consent role of the
Senate. As the Supreme
Court has stated, -The structural interests protected by the Appointments
Clause are not those of any
one branch of Government but of the entire Republic.' Refor"ming the
vacancies law is essential in this
regard. Let us reaffirm the separation of powers for the sake of the
Senate and the entire Republic.


