 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. RicejOU=OPDjO=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATEjTIME:18-JUN-1998 14:49:19.00

 SUBJECT:   POTUS Q&A in case you haven't seen

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia DailardjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena KaganjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura EmmettjOU=WHOjO=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. ReedjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Q    Mr. President, do you have any plans to resurrect
tobacco, perhaps in the House? And how?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, yesterday many of the Republicans
senators who I called -- and I talked to 10 of them yesterday -- said
that they had been approached by Senator Lott about the prospect of
putting some sort of special group together of four. Republicans and
four Democrats and maybe having them try just in a matter of a few
days to come up with a bill they thought would actually not only pass
the Senate, but could be written into law. And if that's a
good-faith effort they're willing to make, that's certainly one
option that I would consider.

             But I don't intend to continue -- to stop fighting for
this.  I think it's obvious to everybody in the world what happened.
This bill was voted out of the committee 19 to 1. Some of the people
who voted for it in the Republican Caucus then did not vote for it on
the floor, even though every major amendment which was adopted to the
bill was sponsored by a Republican senator. And I think it's pretty
clear what happened.

              They may believe that the $40 million in advertising by
the tobacco companies changed public opinion irrevocably and
permanently, and, therefore, it's safe to walk away from the biggest
public health obligation that this country has today.   I don't
believe that.

             But even if the politics have changed, the merits
haven't.  One more day will pass today when 3,000 more children will
start to smoke even though it's illegal to sell them cigarettes, and
1,000 of them will have their lives shortened because of it.   And for
us to sit here and do nothing in the face of evidence which has been
mounting during this debate -- the Minnesota case, during this
debate, gave the freshest and in some cases the most vivid
documentary evidence of all from the tobacco companies themselves
that they've known about the addictive qualities of nicotine for
years, and that they have deliberately marketed cigarettes to
children for years, even though they knew it was against the law to
do it, because they needed what they call "replacement smokers."
·


                 Now, the bill is simple in its outline and clear in its
    objectives. And in terms of the complications of it, many of those
    were added by the people who now are criticizing it.

                 So, on balance, I think the case is still so
    overwhelming that we ought to keep working on it, and I'm prepared --
    you know, I've been working on this for years. When we started, most
    people didn't think we'd get as far as we have, and I don't think
    that we intend to stop until we prevail. And sooner or later we
    will, because it's the right thing to do.

                 Q    Sir, how will you finance this child care
    initiative and other things that were contained in that bill without
    ruining the budget?

                 THE PRESIDENT: We can only finance -- we can finance
    that part of it which is within our own budget, and that part of it
    which was dedicated to -- which would had to have been financed by
    the states and which was within a menu of things that we supported
    that the states could spend it on won't be financed unless the states
    get the money some other way. And I think that's unfortunate,
    because I think that would be a good expenditure of some of the
    money.

                 Keep in mind, most of the federal money was designed to
    be spent on -- directly on health care --on medical research, on
    smoking cessation programs, on programs designed to deal with the
    consequences of the health problems that are directly related to
    smoking in this country. And that was, of course, a part of the
    Senate's decision in killing it.

                 I think it's important to point out also that there were
    -- that this bill is temporarily dead because of the unusual rule of
    the Senate that requires 60 percent, not 51 percent, of the Senate to
    pass on any bill other than the budget if somebody objects to it.   So
    for all the $40 million in spending -- and as reported in the paper
    today, all the commitment to run the same ads all ov~r again in
    November to protect the Republican members who voted with them --
    they still could only muster 43 votes. And two of those votes were
    people who wanted a better provision for the tobacco farmers and
    essentially supported the bill.

                 So, essentially, what you've got is 41 people denying
    the American people and denying the huge majority of the United
    States Senate, including a number of Republicans, the right to pass a
    tobacco bill, and ask the House to do the same to protect our
    children. That's not a long way from success. And that means that
    each and everyone of the members of the Republican Caucus who voted
    for that was in a way personally responsible for the death of the
    bill.

                 It's not all -- it's dead today.  It may not be dead
    tomorrow. And it's not dead over the long run because the public
    health need is great.  I've never quit on anything this important in
    my life, and I don't intend to stop now.  There are too many futures
    riding on it, and I think in the end we will prevail.


