 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUN-1998 11:37:52.00

 SUBJECT:     Here are Q&A

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Tobacco Q&A
 June 22, 1998 -- 6/21 11:00 am DRAFT


 Q:         What did the President announce today?

 A:      Today, President Clinton announced that the Department of
 Health and Human Services will issue annual reports providing fuller and
 more accurate information on teen tobacco use than ever before, including
 information on teen tobacco use by brand.  Noting that parents have a
 right to know which companies are marketing products to their children and
 that public health officials can use this information to reduce tobacco
 use among youth, the President reaffirmed his commitment to taking every
 step he can -- with or without the Congress -- to stop teen smoking.  When
 the Congress takes up comprehensive tobacco legislation, these new data
 will form the basis for lookback surcharges that will ensure tobacco
 companies undertake meaningful efforts to reduce youth smoking.

 Q:         How will these new data be used?

 A:      The collection of data on youth tobacco use by brand will give
 parents new information and provide public health officials with new tools
 to address youth tobacco use.  With this information, public health
 officials can determine how different kinds of tobacco marketing campaigns
 (e.g., the Joe Camel campaign) affect tobacco use, and they can target
 their tobacco control efforts accordingly.  And when the corigress once
 again takes up comprehensive tobacco legislation, these new data will form
 the basis for lookback surcharges that will ensure tobacco companies
 undertake meaningful efforts to reduce youth smoking.

 Q:         How will these new tobacco data be collected?

 A:      To provide the information the President has called for, the
 Department of Health and Human Services will expand one of its major
 annual surveys, the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA),
 conducted by the Office of Applied Studies in the Substance Abuse and
 Mental Health Services Administration.   In particular, HHS will:

  Expand the NHSDA to collect information on youth tobacco use by brand.
 Currently the survey collects information on the percentage of children
 that use different types of tobacco products (e.g., cigarettes,
 smokeless), but does not collect information about which brands of these
 tobacco products children use.

  Increase the number of teenagers surveyed.   HHS will increase the number
 of 12- to 17-year-olds surveyed to 22,500 to provide more precise
 estimates of youth use of tobacco, drugs, alcohol,  and other substances.


 Introduce Computer-Assisted Technology.  The survey will incorporate a
new, state of the art technology called "Audio Computer Assisted Self
Interview" or ACASI to collect information from respondents. with ACASI,
respondents listen to questions through earphones and enter their
responses by punching keys on a laptop computer. The greater privacy and
confidentiality afforded respondents through ACASI increases the
truthfulness of survey responses, which improves the accuracy and
usefulness of the results.  For 1999, this technology will be used only
for questions related to tobacco use.  It will be incorporated for other
questions during the 2000 and 2001 surveys.

Q:      By adding tobacco questions to the drug survey, isn't the
President once again saying he thinks tobacco is a greater threat to our
children than drugs?    .

A:      In fact these changes will help us collect better information
on both drug use and tobacco use.  Expanding the number of 12- to
17-year-olds surveyed in the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse will
give us more precise estimates of nationwide use and incorporating
computer-assisted technology will improve the truthfulness of the
responses.

Q:      Does the PresidentD,s action today mean that he has given up on
Congress?

A:      Not at all.  The President will continue to fight for
bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation in both the Senate· and the
House.  But the President is determined to move forward to protect
AmericaD,s children from tobacco, with or without the Congress.


