 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL             (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUN-1998 17:32:58.00

 SUBJECT:     Your other hero

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 McCain's Fate Lies in Tobacco Fight

                      Monday, June 22, 1998; 2:42 p.m. EDT

                      By LAURIE KELLMAN

                      Associated Press Writer

                      WASHINGTON (AP) -- John McCain's name is plastered all
 over Iowa
                   this year, ordinarily a good sign for a politician's
 presidential prospects.

                      But conservative Republicans and tobacco companies have
 linked his
                   name to the word "tax"   and that has raised questions
 whether the Arizona
                   senator's crusade against cigarette smoking will help or
 hurt him.

                      "No McCain tax, "          said a red-and black lapel button
 worn by many
                      delegates to the state's GOP convention. "Oppose the
 McCain tobacco
                      tax, "         blare the television ads, more than a dozen times
 a day. And
                      displayed in Iowa's convenience store windows:         "Defeat
 the McCain
                      tax.   I   I




                   The widely admired war hero is the most visible
 Republican champion of
                   anti-smoking legislation and personifies the potential
 political fallout from
                   that intense debate.

                   Coming up with the measure, McCain says, "wasn't my
 idea, " but writing
                   it with White House cooperation was. As for the $40
 million tobacco
                   industry campaign he blames for killing the bill,
 McCain, 61, says wryly,
                   "Thanks. ' ,

                   " I want to thank them for raising my name ID,
 especially in states like
                   Arizona, Iowa and New Hampshire, " McCain said.


                      "They made me a household word -- like 'dirt,'"   he
 quipped.

                   Self-effacing humor has helped generate years of
 favorable news coverage
                   for the 61-year-old Arizona senator, though McCain
 damaged his
                   nice-guy image this month with a joke he told GOP
 contributors at a
                   private fund-raiser.

                   The line, people close to McCain confirmed, went
 something like this:
                   Why is Chelsea Clinton so ugly? Because Janet Reno is
 her father.

                   That controversy came just as President Clinton and
 McCain were trying .
                   to save the tobacco bill. The senator apologized.
 Clinton accepted.

                   Politically, McCain holds strong conservative
 credentials earned during his
                   12-year congressional career. The American Conservative
 union gives
                   him a 95 percent approval rating, and the liberal
 Americans for
                   Democratic Action rates him with o.

                      But conservatives helped shoot down the bill and its
 proposal to raise
                      cigarette prices by $1.10 a pack. And McCain's clout
 with that wing of
                      the party was hurt, colleagues say.

                   "The consequence of an act like this is that it lifts
 his profile to the base
                   and those are the folks that anyone who might be seeking
 presidential
                   office has to go to be nominated, " said Sen. Larry C
 raig, R-Idaho, one of
                   the bill's staunchest opponents. " I believe the base of
 our party was
                   strongly opposed to this legislation.' ,

                    On the other hand, McCain's admirers say the tobacco
 bill appeals to the
                    political center and helps seal his image as a reformer
 not afraid to buck
                    his party.

                   It follows his effort at campaign finance overhaul,
 which was killed this
                   year in the Senate. Other efforts in which McCain played
 a leading role
                   passed, such as the line item veto and the gift ban.

                   " I t shows the guy is just gutsy as hell," says Bob
 Haus, a longtime Iowa
                   GOP activist who was aligned in 1996 -- as was McCain


 with Sen.
                       Phil Gramm but has signed on this time with the campaign
 of publisher
                       Steve Forbes.

                       "You can disagree with (McCain) on the issues, but you
 can't stand back
                       and not respect him,"   Haus says.

                       Mike Hellon, chairman of the Arizona Republican Party,
 recalls that at a
                       recent meeting of West Coast Republicans, "Everyone was
 ragging on
                       me, saying can't you do something about McCain?

                   " I said look, I don't agree with McCain on this, I
 think he's wrong but
                   you're not going to change his mind,"  Hellon says. "He
 has reached an
                   elite status in politics where his personal prominence an
 d influence
                   transcends any specific issue."

                       McCain's bill not only would have cost tobacco companies
 billions of
                       dollars but would have approved new authority for the
 Food and Drug
                       Administration, an agency many Republicans want to
 dismantle.

                       Back in Washington, conservatives howled. The bill's
 terms, they said,
                       violated the GOP's campaign promise to lower taxes and
 shrink
                       government.

                       Some of the loudest objections came from senior senators
 who had been
                   charged originally with designing a tobacco bill
 together -- until they made
                   no progress and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott handed
 the issue to
                   McCain.

                       One of them, Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, dubbed McCain's
 bill "pitiful
                       written by the White House. "   Assistant Majority Leader
 Don Nickles of
                       Oklahoma called it "a bad bill"      and a   crummy tax incr
 ease. "   One time,
                       he described the measure's fate by producing the sound
 effects of an
                       exploding bomb.

                       The tobacco bill might have the same effect on McCain's
 hopes for the
                       GOP presidential nomination, some Republicans say.

                   The cigarette price increase could only be received
 badly in the nation's


                     first primary state, whose slogan is --Live Free or
 Die, "   opponents say.

                   --It certainly raised his name ID in the state of New
 Hampshire, but in a
                   negative way, " said Marc Chretien, New England
 political director for
                   Dan Quayle's Campaign America. --That is perceived pretty
  much as a
                   Democrat-supported initiative.' ,

                      Despite the pounding he's taken in conservative circles,
 McCain has kept
                      his sense of humor.

                      --I was'always more of a vegetarian than a Republican,"
 he quipped.

                   Actually, he's still partial to red meat of both the
 bovine and political
                   varieties.

                      --Come on,"   he said. --I was kidding."


