RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I    )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUN-1998 16:24:37.00

SUBJECT:   Your hero

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
LA Times interview, Friday:


THE PRESIDENT: Let me tell you what we're doing now, is
we're exploring every conceivable alternative for how we could come
up with a bill that can actually pass the Congress that would do the
job of reducing teen smoking. The only thing I have ruled out, which
I did earlier today in my press conference, was just taking some
slimmed-down bill that would make a mockery of the process so that
Congress could say it did something.

             I believe that the central reason the tobacco companies
pulled out was not so much the money but was the uncertainty as to
whether there would be some liability cap. And there was an unusual
coalition of liberals and conservatives, for an unusual set of
reasons, who voted against that; which is why, after consultation
with Senator Lott, I came out and clearly said that I would be
prepared to accept one and I thought they ought to vote for it. And
I still believe that.

             And the reason is clear. Whether your philosophically
opposed to a liability cap or not as part of the settlement, under
prevailing Supreme Court decisions I think it's clear that if we want
the tobacco companies to limit their advertising and marketing, in
order to do that they're going to have to understand to some extent
what their financial exposure is in the future.

             So for me, I have no problem with that, and I think if
you talked to anybody who really wants a bill, they will tell you
that in the end, if we're going to get a bill, it·will have to have
some kind of liability cap on it.  So it ought not to be too generous
to tobacco companies.  It ought to be something they still feel,if
they continue to do the wrong thing.

             But if you look at -- there are three elements. All the
studies show there are three elements which has led to a very high
rate of teen smoking, even though it's illegal in every state to sell
cigarettes,to teenagers. One is the price.   If the price were
higher, kids wouldn't be as likely to buy them.  Two is the
advertising. And three is the access.

             So we've got to try to deal with all three of those
things.  Then we need the bill to deal with the public health issues.
And we need something for the tobacco farmers.  And everything else,
as far as I'm concerned, can be subject to negotiations.

             So I'm looking at -- we've discussed three or four or
five different ways that we can get this thing back on track.  But


the Senate knows what the parameters are.  They could -- we could
send them up a bill tomorrow that would pass the Senate if they
decided they were going to do it.

             Q      Do you have a bill?   I mean, a White House bill.

             THE PRESIDENT:  No, we don't, because we thought it was
better    in consultation with the Republicans, we thought it was
better to let them have a committee bill.  So they voted this bill
out 19 to 1, and some of the people who voted for the bill voted
against it on the floor yesterday -- the day before yesterday.

             Q    So you can't see a scenario giving them political
cover of having a White House bill?

             THE PRESIDENT: Oh, I don't mind giving them political
cover. Don't misunderstand me.   I don't mind -- to me, this is about
the kids.  If there is an agreement and there are members -- there
are Democrats who are worried about being attacked because they gave
a liability cap or Republicans who are worried about being attacked
because they voted for a bill that would increase the price of
cigarettes a buck a pack or however much it is in the bill, or they
want to have some differences in the particulars as it's implemented,
I don't mind doing that.

             I think that this administration, I think because of the
stand that I have taken and the stand the Vice President has taken, I
think that our credibility on this is pretty strong.  People know we
really believe in this and we really believe it ought to be done.
And I think everyone understands that any complicated piece of
legislation has to represent a series of compromises.

             So I'm more than happy to do all that, but I just -- I'm
not prepared to adopt a bill that I don't think will do the job and
that no reputable public health authority believes will do the job.
That's my only bottom line.

             I don't -- I'm not interested in gaining any political
benefit from this except insofar as it's necessary to induce people
to ultimately pass the right kind of bill. That's my only objective
here.  I think this is a public health opportunity of a generation
for the United States, and to squander it because there was $40
million in unanswered advertising by the tobacco companies, to which
there are very good answers, is a great -- it would be a great pity.
And I think in the end it's a misreading of the political opinions
and character of the American people for the Republican majority to
think that they've gotten some big victory here.  I just don't agree
with that, and I hope we can work it out.


