           RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

           CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

           CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JUL-1998 11:23:21.00

           SUBJECT:     tobacco court

           TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ:UNKNOWN

           TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TEXT:
           Anything we can do with this?   Talk to Jose about his drug courts.


           Utah Opens a New Front in the War Against Teen
           Smoking

           Katharine Biele, Special to The Christian Science Monitor, July 6, 1998

           SALT LAKE CITY -- He was a kid who lived in a group home - very
           structured, very strict. So
           one night he slipped out. When he climbed back in the window at 3 a.m.,
           they were waiting for him.
           He told the judge that he just wanted to get out for a smoke with his
           buddies.

           "With some kids, smoking is like a right of passage," says Chris Decker,
           the guardian who worked
           with the boy in juvenile court. "It's something they can control, and
           gives them a feeling of freedom."

           Normally, in a court system flushed with cases of drug dealing and violent
           crime, such offenders
           would get a $25 fine or a short stint in a stop-smoking program. But under
           a pioneering new court to
           open this fall in Utah, teen smokers will get more attention - and harsher
           penalties.

           Utah's Tobacco Court is the first of its kind in the nation. Coming at a
           time when President Clinton
           has put teen smoking high on the nation's agenda, it is an experiment in
           how best to reform young
           violators. And it could hold valuable lessons for other states seeking to
           cut rising youth-smoking
           rates.

           The creation of Joseph Anderson, a judge in Utah's Third District, the
           court has been on the drawing
           board for the past 2-1/2 years. Judge Anderson found that he was one of a
           few juvenile judges
           trying to deal with smoking infractions, which most saw as insignificant
           compared with other juvenile
           problems.



"They said there are just too many of them .... 'We don't have the
resources,' " says Anderson,
whose Third District handles half of the state's 10,000 smoking violations
each year. "Both in terms
of health problems and legal problems, we needed to do something."

Indeed, proponents of the new court point out that, according to the US
surgeon general, cocaine
use is 30 times more likely among smokers than nonsmokers. Others say
smoking is also a strong
indicator of deep-seated problems.

"You tend to see kids smoking who don't have much else in their lives,"
says Mr. Decker.

For the Utah courts, other addictions and problems have been higher
priority. Only reluctantly did
the Utah Supreme Court let Anderson experiment with his program for a
year. The state court gave
him $10,000 to start, and he eked out $20,000 more from other contributors
including the state
attorney general and the state health department. That's enough to get the
program up and running.

Tobacco Court will work out of small claims court with volunteer, pro-tem
judges. They will have
the authority to levy fines as much as $250, require community service,
and send youths to
smoking-education programs. If the teens thumb their noses at the law,
they can have their driving
privileges suspended.

"Our emphasis is to push them toward education," says Anderson. Tobacco
Court will use a
program called STTOP - Stop Teen Tobacco - one of a few substance-abuse
programs that
concentrates exclusively on smoking. The program reinforces good behavior
through activities and is
heavily reliant on parental participation, says coordinator Raymond
Christy.

That was a problem for Anderson when he sentenced the boy from the group
home. The courts had
already terminated the boy's family's parental rights. Instead, Anderson
sent the boy to the program
with a worker from the home.

"Smoking isn't a simple problem," says Decker. "When you look at the
different reasons kids smoke
- their home life, emotional needs, and other situations ... it's hard to
know which incentives and
consequences you use."

Now, Tobacco Court has a year to prove that it can mete out the right
incentives and consequences.


