      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUL-1998 16:58:45.00

      SUBJECT:   Education Update

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     As we discussed, attached is a Shireman/Cohen memo to you and Gene,
     providing you an update on where we stand on our education initiatives,
     and steps we can take to promote our class size and school construction
     agenda over the next few months.==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D22]MAIL49357698H.126 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504300060000010A020100000002050000000433000000020000F11A8D6E25DBAF657E4538
     AOC2932712485677297C86603C15CD1250A3BC6B594B178872C061D4F9A67F624B7603E1EE685C
     2A76864A3ECB1AA65D87BEC8EC5F8D1EBD75D8997CF9E7FA81B0880DF6185B8237ACBE070D8293
     EOAOF884049CA33E10C2C78A844E3BE3E5F8C3AOCEB4A440EE6BB74BF7B4F636797C9E61A5DED1
     E431FC19B55701D7F5D70A1CA732FOA4F44AD2C90CDA98301FBA41AF189709681863938F5DB60F
     12BA1BEC56596D211FC9BACEC9330BAC817B40A59F32EAECB7468DF129673839E70C0164AD6AD7
     55B2B2930D89CD83D20C8FF696C4CB7C1C31F2A5A5457ED65B1AF2889947E7AB75F753C10E2E83
     79D06A8A91DBEE92FA862A6040D8EAF72918CD4A11F265E002F5AB93DE73ECF3379BF2E24994DB

MEMORANDUM FOR GENE SPERLING AND BRUCE REED

FROM:           Bob Shireman and Mike Cohen

SUBJECT:        Outlook for Education Priorities


        As we recently reviewed education legislation in Congress, it became clear that we may
see several pieces of education legislation come to the President's desk this year, even while
Congress blocks action on our major proposals for Class Size Reduction and School
Construction, and our investments in current programs. We wanted to provide you with our
overview so that we can discuss strategy for the few weeks that remain in this legislative session.
 The key question that we need to consider is: Given the outlook for the rest of the year, how do
we get traction to force Congress to act on class size, school modernization, and education
appropriations?

I. Certainties

         There are only two education items that Congress is virtually certain to address in its final
month:

         1. Veto override on Education Savings Accounts (Coverdell), with its riders (such as
         reading). While the vote is sure to fail, it is the message that the Republicans want: they
         are for something popular for education, we are against it.

         2. Funding (appropriations or continuing resolution). In addition to the fight over
         funding levels, this may include riders on national tests, block grants and other issues.
         We are struggling with how to gain the upper hand on appropriations, given the media's
         insistence that our budget request is not realistic due to the demise of tobacco legislation.
         This is the crucial bill for the education groups; it will occupy the vast majority of their
         time, and they will support our efforts outside the appropriations bill to the extent that
         they see us supporting increased education investments in the appropriations bill.

II. Possibilities

      There are several bills with bipartisan support that could reach the President's desk before
Congress adjourns:

         1. Higher Education Act reauthorization.       Assuming certain details are worked out,
         we would want to take credit for lower student loan interest rates, the government's first
         "perfonnance-based organization," High Hopes, distance learning, and teacher training.
         The House has acted, and Senate action is expected soon.

                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    HeX' Dump CO:lversion
        "Skill Grant," consolidation of programs, and other program improvements. The bill is
        in conference.

        3. America Reads. The House passed a bill last year, and the Senate Committee has
        reported out its own version. One version or the other could be considered soon on the
        Senate floor, and either would be acceptable to us. The House version is better
        positioned to pass the Senate, though the education community is strongly opposed to it
        because of what they see as a "voucher-like" provision and a governance mechanism and
        funding stream that bypassed the state education agency.

       4. Charter Schools. The House passed a bill last year, and the Senate Committee will
       mark up its version within the next several weeks, most likely on July 22. Both versions
       provide incentives for states to expand charter schools programs, and to provide stronger
       accountability for results. The President supported the House version before it passed,
       and we should do the same for the Senate at the appropriate time. If this is enacted, we
       can highlight it as another step to help reach the President's goal of 3,000 charter schools.

       5. Ed-Flex. Sens. Frist and Wyden have introduced a bill to expand Ed-Flex to all 50
       states. The bill is likely to be marked up next week along with the Charter Schools bill.
       We are working with them to ensure that it incorporates both greater flexibility as well as
       accountability for results. At present, there is little enthusiasm for expanding Ed-Flex
       among Democrats or the education groups, and conservative Republicans (e.g., Coats)
       who favor block grants may oppose this on the grounds that it will weaken the case for
       block grants. Nonetheless, if added to the charter schools bill and ifthere is sufficient
       time to take this up, it is likely to pass the Senate and be accepted by the House in
       conference.

       6. Head Start Reauthorization. The Senate has marked up a bipartisan Head Start bill,
       and Riggs will take it up shortly in the House. There may be some controversial
       elements in the House (e.g., vouchers, English-only), though Riggs is eager to get a bill
       passed this year and presumably will not let it get hung up over those issues.

       7. Vocational Education Reauthorization. Bipartisan approaches have passed the
       House and Senate and are headed for conference. Work has already begun at the staff
       level, but the House has not yet named conferees and may want to kill the bill because of
       right-wing worries that the bill will promote school-to-work.

III. Defensive Battles

       In addition to the battles that we face on the appropriations bill, Congress is moving
legislation on:

       1. Block Grants. The House committee has reported a block grant that combines 29
       programs, including Goals 2000, School-to-Work, the Technology Literacy Challenge
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
       floor within the next few weeks. There is a chance that Roemer may strike a deal with
       Republicans to add an accountability provision, which could add Democratic support to
       the bill and which would be quite problematic for us. There is no companion bill in the
       Senate at present, and we suspect it will be difficult to find floor time to take it up.

       2. Bilingual Education. The Riggs bilingual education bill has been reported out of
       committee and has also been attached to the appropriations bill. The prospects for floor
       action are uncertain, and there is little chance this will be taken up in the Senate.
       Nonetheless, this issue will continue to occupy a good deal of our time and could
       potentially be quite divisive for House Democrats.


IV. Getting Traction on Our Agenda

        While Congress may move forward on some of the items described above, Congress has
not held any hearings on legislation that the President has proposed for Reducing Class Size,
School Modernization, and Education Opportunity Zones.

In addition, the House Appropriations subcommittee has rejected $2 billion in increases proposed
in our FY 99 Budget (while providing increases for some programs we proposed to freeze, such
as special education). Further, we will again face a major battle over national testing on the
appropriations bill.

          Just as the President did on Monday, we should take every opportunity to run down the
list of items on which Congress has failed to act, including:

             On July 15, when the House Appropriations Committee marks-up the
              Labor-HHS-Education bill.
             When the Coverdell bill is vetoed.
             In the July 18 radio address on Charter Schools.
             At the AFT speech on July 20 and the International Teachers' Organization
              speech on July 29.
             In the August 29 education radio address.
             In the August 31 interview.
             As opportunities arise.

In addition, we recommend working with the Democratic leaders in Congress on a Class
Size-School Modernization strategy that would include:

       July: Discharge Petition in the House of Representatives. Democrats, and perhaps
       the education groups, would announce an effort to bring the School Modernization bill
       and the Class Size Reduction bill to the floor in September by gathering signatures on a
       discharge petition. Progress could be noted periodically, so that supporters can use the
       information and apply pressure locally. (While the Senate does not have discharge
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

August: School Visits and Surveys. For the August recess, we would provide
Members of Congress with "kits" for holding media events on school modernization and
class size reduction. The approaches would include local surveys of needs, town
meetings, and forums. Cabinet members would be available to participate in some of the
activities ..

September 8: POTUS School Visit. POTUS would visit a school in Maryland or
Virginia, and FLOTUS and VPOTUS would visit schools elsewhere in the country.
Ideally, there would be examples of a school in need of repairs, a school experiencing
burgeoning enrollment, a school with class sizes that are too large (or perhaps just right),
and a modernized school. The visit(s) could be beamed by satellite for local events
across the country, featuring local Members of Congress and/or supportive organizations.

       Press hook: We would release the Education Department's "Baby Boom Echo"
       report -- new data, state-by-state, on the record number of children in school. In
       the past two years, this report has gotten extensive tv and print coverage.

September-October:        To be determined.




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                   Department of the Treasury Analysis

Over 3 million teenagers smoke cigarettes on a daily basis in the United States. An additional
2 million smoke on a less than daily basis, but are at risk of becoming chronic daily users.

       The most recent data show that 25 percent of high school seniors were daily smokers;
        another 12 percent smoked on a less than daily basis. In addition, underage youth
        smoking has been on an upward trend -- smoking rates among high school students rose
        by nearly a third between 1991 and 1997, from 27.5 percent to 36.4 percent.

Reducing youth smoking is the best way to reduce the overall incidence of smoking in the future;
 90 percent of adult daily smokers first begin smoking cigarettes as teenagers.

The most reliable method for reducing teen smoking is to increase the price of cigarettes.

       Recently released tobacco company documents demonstrate that the tobacco industry has
        known for years that youths are very responsive to price. A 1981 Philip Morris memo
        analyzed the research and concluded "it is clear that price has a pronounced effect on the
        smoking prevalence of teenagers."

       A large number of rigorous economic studies have shown that teen smoking is responsive
        to changes in the price of cigarettes. A consensus view is that the number of teen
        smokers declines by about 7 percent for a 10 percent increase in the real price of
         .          I
        cigarettes.

                 This relationship represents the response for a very small change in prices. Our
                 model allows the responsiveness to decline as prices rise, since the smokers that
                 remain at high prices have revealed that they are less responsive to price signals.

Additional efforts beyond price changes can help to reduce youth smoking -- such as eliminating
vending machines, enforcing restrictions on sales to youths, eliminating advertising aimed at
youths, and anti-smoking counter-advertising.

       Studies have shown that fully-enforced sales restrictions have successfully led to
        reductions in youth smoking, particularly for younger teens.

                 A 1991 study in the Journal of the American Medical Association reported a 69
                 percent decline in daily use by seventh and eighth graders in Woodridge, Illinois
                 following legislation and enforcement of restrictions on cigarette sales to minors.2



        lChaloupka, F., and M. Grossman, "Price, Tobacco Control Policies, and Youth Smoking," NBER
Working Paper #5740, 1996.

         2Jason, L. A., P. Ji, M.Anes, S. Birkhead, "Active Enforcement of Cigarette Control Laws in the Prevention
of Cigarette Sales to Minors," Journal a/the American Medical Association, Vol. 266, no. 22, December 11, 1991,
pp.3159-3161.
                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Pwnp Conversion
                 school students' smoking in Leominster, Massachussetts as a result of strictly
                 enforced sales restrictions. 3

                A recent working paper comparing the effectiveness of state and local access
                restrictions estimates that comprehensive access restrictions for youth can lower
                youth smoking by 18%.4

                A number of experts in this area suggest that a conservative assumption for the
                impact of comprehensive sales and marketing restrictions is a 10-20% reduction
                in youth smoking. Based on their opinion and the existing literature, we use this
                range for our estimates.

Hence, a coordinated effort of sizeable price increases and fully-enforced access and advertising
restrictions would be more likely to produce a significant and sustained decline in youth smoking
than either policy by itself.

       The Administration's Budget proposal calls for a significant increase in the real price of
        cigarettes over the next five years. Coupled with comprehensive sales and advertising
        restrictions, that price increase will lead to a 39 to 46 percent reduction in underage teen
        smoking in five years.

       In 2003 alone, the number of young people kept from smoking would be in the range of
        about 1.4 to 1. 7 million teens.

       Over the next five years, the cumulative number of young people kept from smoking
        would be in the range of about 2.4 to 2.8 million teens.

       The direct result of these policies over the next five years is that almost 1 million of
        today's young people will be spared from premature deaths resulting from
        smoking-related diseases.

These estimates illustrate the powerful impact of a combination of price increases and
access/marketing restrictions on youth smoking. But there remains some uncertainty in our
estimates ofthe impact of these policies.

       That is why the President has also called for youth smoking surcharges on the tobacco
        industry if they do not meet targeted reductions in youth smoking. These surcharges will
        help to ensure that we meet our youth targets.

These estimates are based on daily smoking. Because underage teen smoking on less than a
daily basis frequently leads to daily smoking and the subsequent risk of death and disease, the
figures understate the total benefits of these policies.

        3DiFranza, l.R., R.R. Carlson, R.E. Caisse, "Reducing Youth Access to Tobacco," Tobacco Control, 1992.

      4Chalupka, F., and R.L. Pacu1a, "Limiting Youth Access to Tobacco: The Early Impact of the Synar
Amendment on Youth Smoking," Working Paper, University of Illinois-Chicago, January, 1998.
                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


The Treasury Model

        The Treasury model of youth smoking starts from a participation elasticity of -0.7 at the
         current price level of about $1.95 - which means. that a 10% increase in price above its
         current level would reduce the number of teen smokers by 7%.

        But this relationship only holds for very small price changes. For larger and larger
         price increases, the Treasury model predicts somewhat smaller proportional reductions in
         teen smoking. This reflects the fact that the teens most likely to respond to price signals
         are also the first to be discouraged from smoking by a price increase.

        Using this model, a $1.10 increase in the real price of cigarettes is projected to reduce
         youth smoking by 32%. Since a $1.1 0 increase in the real price in 2003 represents a
         53% rise, the associated "average" elasticity is actually _0.6. 5

Industry Views Validate Administration Analysis

        Recently released internal documents from Philip Morris demonstrate that the tobacco
         industry has known for years that youths are very responsive to price.

        A memo from 1981 documents that the tobacco industry understands the compelling
         evidence that youths are very price responsive. This document is a review of the 1981
         working paper by Lewit, Coate, and Grossman, discussed below. This industry review is
         very favorable, and does not question this substantial estimate of youth price
         responsiveness. As the memo states, "The authors of this paper ... have constructed an
         elegant longitudinal and cross-sectional model of teenage smoking behavior. .. The most
         important finding, and the one of greatest significance to the company, is their calculation
         of the price elasticity of cigarettes among teenagers."

        This memo goes on to state " ... it is clear that price has a pronounced effect on the
         smoking prevalence ofteenagers, and that the goals of reducing teenage smoking and
         balancing the budget would both be served by increasing the Federal excise tax on
         cigarettes."




         5The semi-logarithmic demand function underlying this analysis is based on a standard model used to
predict overall cigarette demand. Under it, every dime ($0.10) increase in price reduces demand by the same
percent, but since it is doing so from a smaller and smaller base at each step, the absolute reduction in teen smoking
from each 10 cent increment declines slightly.
                                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                                      Hex.-Dump Conversion
          below. Another Philip Morris strategic planning document from the early 1990s states:
          "There is no question that increasing taxes will cause a decrease in smoking. This point
          is best illustrated by the present situation in Canada."

         In another document dated September 3, 1987, a Philip Morris analysis of price increases
          concluded: "price increases ... prevented 600,000 teenagers from starting to smoke ...
          We don't need to have that happen again."

Previous Academic Studies

         A number of studies have attempted to estimate the responsiveness of youth smoking in
          the U.S. to price changes - the participation elasticity, or the change in the number of
          teen smokers due to price changes. This literature is based on comparisons of youth
          smoking rates in high and low tax states, and on changes in youth smoking within states
          as tax rates change.

         The CBO recently summarized this literature by stating that most of the evidence points
          to participation elasticities ranging from -0.50 to -0.75. The Treasury estimate is in the
          range used by the CBO.

         The results from this literature are shown in the Table below. Because differences in
          elasticity estimates may be less intuitive, the table shows - for each analysis of youth
          smoking - the proj ected reduction in teen smokers from a $1.10 price increase (along
          with the Treasury estimates). This approach recognizes the fact that the Treasury model
          allows the elasticity to decline for larger price increases.



    Study of Teen Smoking                              Percent Reduction in Teen Smoking from
                                                               $1.10 Real Price Increase
    Lewit, Coate, and Grossman (1981)                                     65%
    DeCicca et al. (1998)                                                 46%
    Grossman et al. (1983)                                                41%
    Chaloupka and Grossman (1996)                                         36%
    CBO (midpoint)                                                        34%
    Treasury                                                              32%
    Evans and Huang (1997)                                                28%
    Wasserman et al. (1991)                                               0-9%




                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
      question. Indeed, our estimates are more conservative than what most of the recent work
      in this area would suggest.

     One study which estimates a very different response from the remainder of the literature
      (Wasserman et al.) focuses exclusively on the late 1970s. During this period some
      surveys indicate that youth smoking fell precipitously without a price increase. We
      believe a more appropriate interpretation of the data during the late 1970's is that youth
      smoking was driven down by the broader dissemination of facts about smoking's dangers.
       According to one major survey, only half of 12th graders saw a great risk in smoking a
      pack or more of cigarettes a day in 1975 - the lowest level in the survey - but this
      number increased by nearly 25% between 1975 and 1980. Thus, rather than indicating
      that price does not affect youth smoking, we believe this data shows that other things can
      influence teens in addition to price.

     This same problem has led to a misinterpretation by some of the Evans and Huang paper.
      As Professor William Evans of Maryland pointed out in a recent letter to the Commerce
      Committee, the findings of his paper have been misquoted. As noted in the Table above,
      the estimate that Evans stands behind is very close to the Administration estimate. The
      confusion over his findings arises from the fact that his estimates which include data from
      the late 1970s show a smaller youth elasticity than his estimates which focus on the 1980s
      and 1990s. As Prof. Evans has noted, however, the data are less reliable for this earlier
      period; in addition, as noted above, this was an era when non-price factors were driving
      teen smoking down in the face of constant prices.

The Cornell Study

     Some have cited the recent study by DeCicca et al. as refuting the previous literature. In
      fact, this study finds higher estimates than the remainder of the literature when standard
      estimation techniques are used on their full sample of 8th-12th graders. 6

     The study does find smaller effects when they choose the particular sample of 12th
      graders who weren't smoking in 8th grade, and try to model whether they start smoking.
      But there is no obvious explanation for this anomalous result; after all, removing from
      their model a population that is more addicted to cigarettes - individuals smoking from
      8th to 12th grade - should raise, not lower, the elasticity estimate. It is troubling that
      dropping only 5% of their sample - the 5% of teens that are most addicted - reduces
      their estimate so dramatically.




                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                               HilX,Dwnp Conversion



      6The estimate cited in our Table is an average of their elasticities for 8th, 10th, and 12th graders.
      methodology. A recent re-analysis of their data by Professors Thomas Dee of Georgia
      Tech and William Evans of Maryland has found these results to be very sensitive to the
      particular sample restrictions imposed by the Cornell authors. As these experts note,
      "The results appear to be purely an artifact of the way that the authors constructed the
      analysis sample." When a broader sample of observations is used, there is a very
      significant effect of taxes on youth smoking in their onset model -- indeed, the results are
      quite comparable to the previous literature.

     This partly explains why the results of the Cornell study are so statistically imprecise.
      For example, in this particular model, they estimate that a $1.10 price rise would reduce
      smoking onset by only 7%. However, given the level of statistical imprecision in their
      model, their findings would be equally consistent with a reduction in youth onset of 50%
      or more from this $1.10 price increase - a range which encompasses the Treasury
      estimate, as well as their own estimates using a more straightforward methodology.

     One criticism levied by DeCicca et al. against the earlier literature is that it does not
      control for differences across states at a point in time that might determine youth smoking
      propensities; low tax states may have high smoking because of other regulatory or
      cultural factors. But their approach does not solve this problem; it still relies on
      point-in-time comparisons of smoking onset across states, making it difficult to separate
      out other differences across those states. Other studies address this problem much more
      directly. Chaloupka and Grossman (1996) do so by including a variety of state
      characteristics, including state anti-tobacco regulations. Evans and Huang (1997)
      address the problem even more directly by examining only the effect of within-state price
      changes on youth smoking. The fact that these estimates are so similar to that used by
      Treasury highlights the robustness of the conclusions, and indicates why the previous
      scientific consensus is not undermined by one set of anomalous results.

International Evidence

     There has also been much recent attention paid to the fact that youth smoking remains
      high in other countries with much higher cigarette prices. In particular, Wall Street
      analyst Martin Feldman noted in his testimony of March 19th that youth smoking rose in
      the U.K. between 1988 and 1996, despite a 26% rise in the real price of cigarettes. The
      inference that is often drawn from this type of evidence is that higher prices won't deter
      youth smoking in the U.S.

     But these international comparisons do not tell us much of anything about the response
      ofyouth in the u.s. to price changes. The fact that youth smoking rates remain high in
      other countries reflects other cultural factors that influence youth to smoke, and is not a
      rejection of the fundamental relationship between price and demand. And increased
      smoking among youth in the u.K. between 1988 and 1996 may have more to do with
      other factors, such as a recession which raised youth unemployment rates by 25% over
      this period, than with changes in the price of cigarettes. In light of this concern, it is
      certainly preferable to rely on careful, controlled analysis of U.S. teen smoking than on
      this type of anecdotal international evidence.
                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion



        Nevertheless, if one is going to make international comparisons, then the most
         appropriate one would be to Canada, since it is more similar to and faces many of the
         same cultural influences as the U.S. The two economic studies which estimate the
         effects of cigarette prices on Canadian teens are both consistent with the findings in the
         U.S. literature - teens are not only responsive to price changes, but they are more
         responsive than adults. In fact, the Canadian youth elasticity estimates are higher than
         those for the U.S.

        Moreover, the pattern of youth smoking in Canada during the 1980s confirms the
         sensitivity of youth to price changes.

        In 1981, youth smoking was pervasive in Canada -- 43.5% of Canadian teen were current
         smokers (defined as having smoked in the last thirty days). The youth smoking rate
         during this period was about 50% higher than in the U.S.

        Over the next decade, Canada significantly increased the price of cigarettes. From 1981
         to 1989, the price increased by about 90%. It is worth noting that these price increases
         occurred without significant smuggling; the widely cited smuggling episode from Canada
         did not occur until 1992-1993, when cigarette prices had risen by more than $1.50 above
         their 1989 level.

        These price increases were associated with enormous declines in teen smoking. From
         1981 to 1989, current Canadian teen smoking rates fell from 43.5% to 22.6%, a decline of
         almost fifty percent. During this period there were no substantial change in teen
         smoking rates in the U.S., so by 1991 Canada's teen smoking rate was lower than ours.

        The implied Canadian elasticity of -0.52 is very close to the estimate that would be
         computed by the Treasury model (which allows the price responsiveness to fall as the
         magnitude of the price increase grows) for this large a price rise, which is an elasticity of
         -0.51. The large declines in Canadian youth smoking rates represent largely the impacts
         of price increases, as opposed to other public policies designed to curb teen smoking.
         From 1981 to 1989, Canada did not impose any significant public health policy changes
         designed to reduce teen smoking.

        In the early 1990s, smuggling did become a problem in Canada, and the government
         lowered dramatically its federal excise taxes. As a result, between 1991 and 1994 teen
         smoking began to rise again in Canada. Of course, teen smoking was on the rise in the
         U.S. over this period as well, so it is not as easy to attribute all of the rise in Canada over
         this time period to price impacts. But the fact remains that for the country most
         comparable to the   u.s., teen smoking rates fell as prices rose, and rose as prices fell.




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex.Dwnp Conversion


