      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUL-1998 14:43:55.00

      SUBJECT:   REVISED LABOR Draft Bill on Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 1998

      TO: Laurence R. Jacobson ( CN=Laurence R. Jacobson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jon D. Haveman ( CN=Jon D. Haveman/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jennifer E. Brown ( CN=Jennifer E. Brown/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Donna M. Rivelli    ( CN=Donna M. Rivelli/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Nancy E. Schwartz ( CN=Nancy E. Schwartz/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Robert G. Damus    ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Sandra Yamin ( CN=Sandra Yamin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Randolph M. Lyon ( CN=Randolph M. Lyon/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Christopher D. Carroll ( CN=Christopher D. Carroll/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Sarah S. Lee ( CN=Sarah S. Lee/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Louisa Koch ( CN=Louisa Koch/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Rodney G. Bent ( CN=Rodney G. Bent/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP    [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Cecilia E. Rouse   ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Carole Kitti ( CN=Carole Kitti/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barry White   ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: James C. Murr ( CN=James C. Murr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP    [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: mmorin ( mmorin @ dol.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The document has been redlined to indicate changes made to the earlier
version.
---------------------- Forwarded by Melissa N. Benton/OMB/EOP on 07/09/98
02:39 PM ---------------------------
Total Pages: ____


LRM ID: MNB199
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Wednesday, July 8, 1998

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                       Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:             Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                PHONE: (202) 395 -7 887 FAX: (202) 395 -6148
SUBJECT:        REVISED LABOR Draft Bill on Trade Adjustment Assistance
Reform Act of 1998

DEADLINE:                 Noon   Monday, July 13, 1998

In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: To follow is the Department of Labor's revised draft of the
Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 1998.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:


25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
128-US Trade Representative - Fred Montgomery - (202) 395-3475
61-JUSTICE - L. Anthony Sutin - (202) 514-2141
7-AGRICULTURE - Marvin Shapiro - (202) 720-1516
110-Social Security Administration - Judy Chesser - (202) 358-6030
118-TREASURY - Richard S. Carro - (202) 622-0650
30-EDUCATION - Jack Kristy - (202) 401-8313

EOP:
Barbara Chow
Barry White
Larry R. Matlack
Carole Kitti
Jonathan Orszag
Cecilia E. Rouse
Karen Tramontano
Elena Kagan
Robert G. Damus
Rodney G. Bent
Nancy E. Schwartz
Louisa Koch
Donna M. Rivelli
Sarah S. Lee
Jennifer E. Brown
Christopher D. Carroll
Jon D. Haveman
Randolph M. Lyon
Laurence R. Jacobson
Daniel J. Chenok
Janet R. Forsgren
James C. Murr
LRM ID: MNB199 SUBJECT:    REVISED LABOR   Draft Bill on Trade Adjustment
Assistance Reform Act of 1998


RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:            Melissa N. Benton Phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
               Office of Management and Budget
               Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                          (Name)


                                                             (Agency)

                                                             (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

               Concur

               No Objection

               No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

               Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet

==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00: 00: 00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D64]MAIL41108598R.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436COSOOOOOIOA02010000000205000000DBAI0000000200005D87DFC63AD19D84543ECB
AOAOA8E07F2DOOF76334AFBBE972FA870CCBFA38A700BECDA999D9F58DD687CCC3B657A813E228
7ADCFE2DIC6EDCC64624FC2A9DBDBE43522646332846298816C612A68F68D55C05C19C9455F424
0704792B94008496EIA6E310C5AC34578A6008BF44248D36788D9E3C8980688552C3112A28A2AB
02F5702A9C26385E30BC99F622DE6B8612C4F3FE859BE3A7A73E7CB08A371EAEOOC67126C51605
                                                                                                 7/8/98


                   DRAFT TRANSMITTAL LETTER FROM SECRETARY
                           HERMAN TO THE CONGRESS

       I enclose for the consideration of the Congress a draft bill entitled the "Trade Adjustment

Assistance Reform Act of 1998." By combining the best features of the existing Trade

Adjustment Assistance (TAA) and the NAFTA Transitional Adjustment Assistance

(NAFT A-T AA) programs into a consolidated T AA program, this draft bill would provide

effective, comprehensive assistance to workers adversely affected by international trade.

       This legislation follows through and expands upon the commitment made by the

President last fall to improve and expand Trade Adjustment Assistance to workers. The draft

bill would authorize the consolidated TAA program for five years, through fiscal year 2003.

The consolidated program would expand eligibility to workers who lose their jobs due to shifts in

production by their firm to other countries. Currently, TAA eligibility is restricted to workers

adversely affected by imports and NAFTA-TAA is limited to workers adversely affected by

imports from or shifts in production to Mexico or Canada. This expanded eligibility will

ensure comprehensive assistance is available to workers who lose their jobs due to imports from

or shifts in production to any foreign country.

       The bill also   erlsll~,Hl:ml   requires the immediate flfOvisioB: of rapid response and basic

readjustment services   'yyjJIJ2,,_m~1.(:L"_'ly_?iJ~thJt;Jo   workers upon the filing of a petition for T AA

eligibility. These services are critical to facilitating rapid reemployment of workers and provide

important information to those workers relating to the resources available at the Federal, State

and local level to assist them. In addition, the legislation requires a one-third reduction in the


                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

TAA; increases the annual cap on training expenditures to $150 million; and provides

contingency funds should the program exhaust appropriated funds in any fiscal year.

        The draft bill also hannonizes the differing rules of the programs relating to requiring

enrollment in training as a condition for receiving income support. These rules would retain the

program's emphasis on linking income support to training while allowing specified, limited

exceptions where appropriate to assist certain workers. In addition, the bill would assist workers

by expanding the period for scheduled breaks in a training program during which a worker may

continue to receive income support.

       The draft bill also contains provisions enhancing coordination between the consolidated

T AA program and the dislocated worker program under the Job Training Partnership Act

(JTPA). In particular, the bill would significantly enhance the accountability of the consolidated

program by ensuring that T AA and the dislocated worker program have common performance

outcome measures and information, which would include information on the placement in

employment, earnings (including wage replacement) and retention in employment of participants.

 The bill would also require coordination to ensure workers have access to employment-related

services available in one-stop career centers and would authorize the use of funds to provide

supportive services. Finally, the bill assures that infonnation will eefltim:le te be collected and

maintained identifying the countries to which production is shined and    Hlo-frOJ1l   which articlcs me

impot1cd that rcsult in certifications and the number of certifications relating to each country.

'['his will include inf(mnation on the number of certifications relating to imports from or shifts in

products to Mexico or Canada, which will assist in making eligibility determinations under

                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                 2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

consolidation of the existing programs would therefore result in a program that responds to the

needs of workers adversely affected by trade in a more rapid, comprehensive, and accountable

manner.

        It should be noted that this legislation would build on administrative eff<')l"ts alreadv

und('Ttaken by the Department to improve the programs. In addition. the legislation would be

supplemented bv the /\dministration's commitment to make funds available under the National

Reserve Account in the JfPA dislocated worker program to address the needs of 'workers ill

firms that are secondarilv atIectecl by international tracle -- that is suppliers to directly affected

firms and assemblers ancl final processors of articles produced bv such finns.        Thesc workers

would be eligible to receive the same assistance available to workers under the consolidated

TAA program,

        Together, these reforms would provide critical assistance to help workers who lose their

jobs due to international trade to obtain reemployment and would help to ensure that all

Americans can benefit from economic change.

        In addition, at the request of the Depal1ment of Commerce, the draft hi n includes a

provision extending telr the same fiYe year period the trade adjustment assistance f()r finns

program administered bv that Department under chapter 3 of lit Ie 11 of the Trade Act or 1974.




                                                   3               Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

                  [INSERT OMB PARAGRAPHS ON PAYGO]


       The Office of Management and Budget advises that...

                                                                 Sincerely,


                                                                 Alexis M. Hennan


Enclosures




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                               4
                                                                         7/898


                                       A BILL
To consolidate and enhance the Trade Adjustment Assistance and NAFTA Transitional

Adjustment Assistance programs, and for other purposes.

       Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives ofAmerica in Congress_

assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE

       This Act may be cited as the "Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 1998".

SEC.2. AUTHORIZATION OF CONSOLIDATED TRADE ADJUSTMENT

ASSISTANCE.

       (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.-Section 245 of the Trade Act of 1974

(19 U.S.C. 2317) is amended to read as follows:

              "Sec. 245. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.- There are authorized to

       be appropriated to the Department of Labor for each of fiscal years 1999, 2000,2001,

       2002,2003, such sums as may be needed to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

       (b) TERMINATION.-Section 285(c) of such Act (19 U.S.c. 2271, preceding note) is

       amended to read as follows:




                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

       under chapter 2, and no technical assistance may be provided under chapter 3. after

September 30, 2003.".

       (c) REPEAL OF SUBCHAPTER D.- Section 250 of the Trade Aet of 1974such Act (19

U.S.C.~     2331 ) is rcpealed.

       @CONFORMING /\MEN DMENT.- Section '149A of such Act (19                 usc. 2322) ti
repealed.

SEC.3. FILING OF PETITIONS AND PROVISION OF RAPID RESPONSE

ASSISTANCE.

       (a) FILING OF PETITIONS- Section 221 (a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19U.S.C.

2271(a)) is amended to read as follows:

       "(a) FILING OF PETITIONS AND RAPID RESPONSE ASSISTANCE.-

              "(1) FILING OF PETITIONS.-A petition for certification of eligibility to apply for

       adjustment assistance under this chapter may be filed by a group of workers (including

       workers in an agricultural firm or subdivision of any agricultural firm) or by their

       certified or recognized union or other duly authorized representative _with the Governor

       of the State in which such workers' firm or subdivision is located. For    pllrpo~es   of this

       paragraph, the dulv authorize representative mav include entities such as the workers'

       firm. the State dislocated worker unit, other State al(encies, and one-stop career centers.

              "(2) STATE RESPONSIBILITIES AND RAPID RESPONSE.-Upon receipt of a

       petition filed under paragraph (1), the Governor shall-

                      "(A) immediately transmit the petition to the Secretary of Labor


                                                 6                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

                       "(B) ensure that rapid response assistance and basic readjustment services

        authorized under other Federal law are made available to the workers covered by the

       petition to the extent authorized under such law; and

                       "(C) assist the Secretary in the review of the petition by verifying such

        information and providing such other assistance as the Secretary may request.

       "(3) PUBLICATION.- Upon receipt of the petition, the Secretary shall promptly publish

notice in the Federal Register that the Secretary has received the petition and initiated an

investigation.".

       (b) EXPEDITED REVIEW OF TAA PETITION BY THE SECRETARY.- Section

223(a) of such Act (19 U.S.c. 2273(a)) is amended by striking "60 days" and inserting "40 days".

SEC.4. ADDITION OF SHIFT IN PRODUCTION AS BASIS FOR TAA ELIGIBILITY.

       Section 222(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2272(a)) is amended to read as

follows:

               "(a) IN GENERAL- A group of workers (including workers in any agricultural

       firm or subdivision of an agricultural firm) shall be certified by the Secretary as eligible to

       apply for adjustment assistance under this chapter pursuant to a petition filed under

       section 221 if the Secretary determines that a significant number or proportion of the

       workers in such workers' firm or an appropriate subdivision of the firm have become

       totally or partially separated, or are threatened to become totally or partially separated,

       and either-

                       "(1) that-

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                  7
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

               have decreased absolutely,

                              "(B) imports of articles like or directly competitive with articles

               produced by such firm or subdivision have increased, and

                              "(C) the increase in imports urider subparagraph (B) contributed

               importantly to such workers' separation or threat of separation and to the

                       decline in the sales or production of such firm or subdivision; or

                       "(2) that there has been a shift in production by such workers' firm or

       subdivision to a foreign country of articles like or directly competitive with

       articles which are produced by the firm or subdivision,",

SEC. 5. ENROLLMENT IN TRAINING REQUIREMENT.

       Section 231 (a)(5)(A) of the '['rade Act of] 974 (19 U ,S,c. 2291(a)(5)(A) is amended to

read as follows:

       "(A)(i) is enrolled in a training program approved by the Secretary under section 236(a);

and

               "(ii) the enrollment required under clause (i) occurs no later than the latest of--

                      "(1) the last day of the 16th week after the worker's most recent total

       separation from adversely affected employment which meets the requirements of

       paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 231(a);

                      "(II) the last day ofthe 8th week after the week in which the Secretary

       issues a certification covering the worker; or

                      "(III) 45 days after the later of subclause (I) or (II), if the Secretary


                                                   8                Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

       emollment period;".

SEC.6. WAIVERS OF TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.

       (a) IN GENERAL- Section 231(c) of the Trade Act of1974 (19 U.S.C.         ~2291(c))        is

amended to read as follows:

              "(c)(1) The Secretary may issue a written statement to a worker waiving the

emollment in training requirement of subsection (a)(5)(A) if the Secretary determines that-

              "(A) the worker has been notified that the worker will be recalled by the      firm

from which the qualifying separation occurred;

                      "(B) the worker has marketable skills as determined pursuant to an

       assessment of the worker, which may include an assessment under the profiling system

       under section 303(j) of the Social Security Act, carried out in accordance with

guidelines    issued by the Secretary;

                      "(C) the worker is within two years of qualifying for retirement benefits

       under the Social Security Act;

                      "(D) the worker is unable to participate in training due to health of the

       worker, except that a waiver under this subparagraph sl1(1l111ot he construed to exempt a

       worker hom requirements relating to availability for work, active search for work, or

       refusal to aeccpt work under State or r·'edernl unemployment compensation laws:

                      "(E) the first available emollment date for the approved training program

       of the worker is within 45 days of the determination made under this paragraph; or

                      "(F) there are insufficient funds available for training under this chapter,


                                                 .9                Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dwnp Conversion

               "(2)If the 8eeretar), detemlines the basis fer issuing'rhc SecretarY shall sp.:cif\; the

duration te)r the _waiver under paragraph (1) is no longer applieable to a worker,and shall

periodicallv revi.:w the waiver to determine whether the basis for issuing the 8eeretary shall issHe

a written statement to the worker revoking the waiver remains applicable. If at any time the

Secretary determines such basis is no longer applicable to the worker. the Secretarv shall revoke

the waiver..

               "(3) Pursuant to the agreement under section 239, the Secretary may

       authorize the State or State agency to carry out activities described in paragraph (I)

(except for the determination under paragraph (l)(F» and paragraph (2).        Such agreement shall

include a requirement that the State or State agency submit to the Secretary the written

statements provided pursuant to paragraph (1) and a statement of the reasons for the waiver.

               "(4) The Secretary shall submit a annual report to the Finance Committee of the

Senate and the Ways and Means Committee of the House of Representatives identifying the

number of workers who received waivers Hnder paragraph (1) and the nlimberand the average

dmation of'Naivers re'f'oked Hnder paragraph (2)sueh \-vaivers issued under this subsection during

the preceding year.".

       (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.- Section 23 I(a)(5)(C) of such Act (19 U.S.c. 2291

(a)(5)(C)) is amended by striking "certified".

SEC.7. PROVISION OF TRADE READJUSTMENT ALLOWANCES DURING BREAKS

IN TRAINING.

       Section 233(t) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2293(t) is amended by striking "14


                                                 10                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex·Dump Conversion

SEC.S. INCREASE IN TAA TRAINING CAP.

       Section 236(a)(2)(A) ofthe Trade Act of 1974 (19 US.C.2296(a)(2)(A» is amended by

striking "$80,000,000" and inserting "$150,000,000".

SEC 9. ELIMINATION OF QUARTERLY REPORT.

       Section 236(d) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 US.c. 2296(d» is amended by striking the

last sentence of such subsection.

SEC.tO. COORDINATION WITH JTPA AND ONE-STOP CAREER CENTERS.

       (a) COORDINATION WITH JTPA.- Section 239(e) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 US.c.

231 1(e» is amended by inserting after the first sentence of such subsection the following

sentence:

               "Such coordination shall include common reporting systems and elements,

       including common elements relating to participant data and performance

       outcomes.".

               (b) COORDINATION WITH ONE-STOPS.- Section 235 of such Act (19 V.S.c.

       2295) is amended by inserting ",including the services provided through one-stop career

       centers" before the period at the end of the first sentence.

SEC. II.SUPPORTIVE SERVICES.

       Section 235 offlle 'frade Act of] 974 (19 U .s.C. "'295) is further amended bv addil1Q at

tile end the J()Howing sentenees:

       "In addition. the Secretary mav authorize the usc offul1ds available under this chapter 12..

provide supportive services to enable adversely affected workers to participate in or complete


                                                 11
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dwnp Conversion

supportive services that is consistent with the provision of sllch services unclcr the   di~l()catcd


worker program under title HI of the Job 'rraining Partnership Aet.",

SELt2.PERFORMANCE INfORMATION.

        Section 239 of the 'rrade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C, 2311) is amended bv addi\lQ the

f()llowing new subsection:

        "(g)   PERFORMANCE INFORM.ATION.

                Anv agreement entered into under this section shall include a requirement that the

State report such performance information as the Sccrctar" may require.      At a minimum, sllch

information shall include thc rates of entered emplovment, wage replacement. earninQs () months

after termination, and retention in emplovment 6 months after termination for participants in the

progrmn undcr this chapter." ,

SEC.l3. AVAILABILITY OF CONTINGENCY FUNDS.

        Section 245 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.c. U-l+2317) is amended by adding at the

end of the following subsection:

                       "(c) CONTINGENCY FUNDS.- Subject to the limitation contained in

                section 236(a)(2), ifin any fiscal year the funds available to carry out the

                programs under this chapter are exhausted, there shall be made available -from

                funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated amounts sufficient to carry out

                such programs for the remainder of the fiscal year."

SEC. H:. INFORMATION ON CERTAIN CERTIFICATIONS.

       Section 223 of the tffi6elracle Act of 1974 (19 U.S.c. 2273) is amended by adding the


                                                  12           Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dwnp Conversion

               "(e) COLLECTION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION.- The Secretary shall collect

and maintain information --relating to

                         (1) identifying the number ofeertifieations under this ehaptor that are

              based on shifts ofcountries to which timls have shifted production to MeJ£ieo and

               Canada, and, to the eJ£tentreslllting in eertitications under section 222(a)( 2), <md

               the number of such eel1ifieations relating to each such country:

                        (2) to the extent feasible, the number ofeertifieations based   OR   imports of

               artieles identifying the countries from Mexieo and Canada."which imports of

               articles have resulted in certifications under section 22')(a)(11). and number of

               certifications relating to each such eountrv.

SECI5. AUTIIORIZATION OF APPIUWRIATIONS FOR TRt\UE AU.JUSTMENT
ASSISTANCE FOR FlH.MS AIJIVUNISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE.

       Section 256(b) of the 'frade Act of 1974 (19 U.s.C.     ~346(b)   is amended to read as

follows:

       "(b) AUTHORJZAfJON OF APPROPRIATIONS.-fhere arc hereby authorized to be

approporiated to the Seeretarv of Commerce for fiscal vears 1999, 2000. 2001. 2002. and 2003

such sums as may be necessary to provide technical assistance under section 253. "




                                                 13                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

        (a) EFFECTIVE DATE.- The provisions of this Act shall take effect on October 1, 1998.

        (b) TRANSITION.- The Secretary is authorized to establish such rules as may be

appropriate to provide for an orderly transition from the provisions of law amended or repealed

by this Act.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                               14              Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                                      7/8/98




                       SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF THE TAA

                     AND NAFTA-TAA CONSOLIDATION ACT OF 1998




        Section 1 provides that the short title ofthe Act is the "Trade Adjustment Assistance

Reform Act of 1998".

        Section 2 contains the authorization for the consolidated Trade Adjustment Assistance

(T AA) program.

        Section 2(a) authorizes such sums as may be necessary to be appropriated to the

Department of Labor to carry out the program for each of the five succeeding fiscal years -- FY

1999 through FY 2003.

        Section 2(b) provides a termination date for assistance under the consolidated program

and for the trade adjustment assistance for firms administered by the Department of Commerce

of September 30,2003.

        Section 2(c) repeals the NAFTA Transitional Adjustment Assistance (NAFTA-TAA)

program.

        Section 3 relates to the filing of petitions and the provision of rapid response assistance

by the States.


                                                 15                Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

to be filed by a group of workers or by their union or other representative with the Governor of

the State in which the workers' finn is located. The other representatives who mav file the

petition on behalf of the workers include entities such as the workers' flrm. the Stall' dislocated

worker unit, other State agencies. and one-stop career centers. The Governor is to immediately

transmit the petition to the Secretary of Labor; ensure that rapid response assistance imd basic

readjustment services authorized under other Federal law are made available to workers covered

by the petition; and assist the Secretary in reviewing the petition by verifying infonnation and

providing such other assistance as the Secretary may request. The Secretary is to publish a

notice in the Federal Register upon receipt of an petition that an investigation has been initiated.

This provision is a hybrid of the current petition procedures under the two programs. Currently

under TAA the petition is filed with the Secretary rather than the State and there is no

requirement that the State provide appropriate rapid response services. Rapid response

assistance and basic readjustment services provide critical infonnation and services that can

often facilitate coordinated planning and more rapid reemployment for affected workers.

Therefore, it is essential that this assistance be included in the consolidated program. Currently,

under NAFT A-TAA the petition is filed with the Governor, who has ten days to make a

preliminary detennination of eligibility, and then transmits the petition to the Secretary for a final

detennination. Rapid response assistance is required upon an affirmative finding. The

consolidated provision relieves the burden on the States of making a preliminary detennination

and avoids unnecessary delay in the provision of rapid response assistance. Under the


                                                  16
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

the Secretary may request, which should assist in expediting the review process.

       Section 3(b) accelerates the time period in which the Secretary is to complete a review of

the petitions from the current 60 days after a petition is filed under T AA to 40 days after a

petition is filed under the consolidated program.

       Section 4 adds as a basis for eligibility under the consolidated T AA program job loss due

to the shift in production by the workers' firm to another country. Currently, T AA eligibility is

limited to workers who are adversely affected by imports. NAFT A-T AA eligibility is based on

workers already affected by imports from Mexico and Canada or a shift in production to either of

those two countries. The consolidated TAA program will base eligibility on workers adversely

affected by either imports from or shifts in production to any foreign country.

       Specifically, the amended section 222(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 would provide that a

group of workers filing a petition will be eligible for assistance if the Secretary detennines that a

significant number or proportion of the workers in the workers' firm or subdivision have become

separated, or are threatened with separation, and either: (1) the sales or production of the firm

have decreased absolutely, imports of articles like or directly competitive with the articles

produced by the firm or subdivision have increased, and the increase in imports contributed

importantly to the workers' separation and to the decline in sales or production by the workers'

finn, or (2) there has been a shift in production by the workers' firm or subdivision to a foreign

country of articles like or directly competitive with the articles produced by the firm or

subdivision.

       Section 5 would apply to the consolidated T AA program an enrollment in training


                                                 17                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

NAFTA-T AA. Under this requirement, in order to be eligible to receive income support under

the program while in training, a worker must be enrolled in training not later than either the last

day of 16th week of a worker's most recent total qualifying separation or the 8th week after a

certification of eligibility is issued. The Secretary may extend these periods by 45 days if there

are extenuating circumstances, such as a course is cancelled or the first available enrollment date

for a particular program is later. This requirement encourages workers to make training

decisions early in their spell of unemployment which will accelerate reemployment and enhance

the adjustment process.

       Section 6 specifies the conditions under which a waiver may be issued from the general

requirement that a worker be enrolled in training to receive income support. This provision is a

 hybrid between the T AA program, which provides general waiver authority where training is

deemed to be not "feasible or appropriate" for a worker, and NAFT A-T AA which doe.s not allow

any waivers of the requirements.

       Specifically, the new provision allows a waiver under the following six conditions: (1)

the worker has been notified that the worker will be recalled to employment; (2) the worker has

marketable skills as determined pursuant to an assessment; (3) the worker is within two years of

qualifying for retirement benefits under the Social Security Act; (4) the worker is unable to

participate in training due to health (except this docs not exempt the worker from avuilable f(Jr

work requirements otherwise applicable to the receipt of income support); (5) the first available

enrollment date is within 45 days; or (6) there are insufficient funds for training under the

chapter. The Secretarv is to speeifv the duration of each waiver and periodica]]\' review the


                                                 18
                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

        These requirementli arc intended to ensure that the primary purpose of income support

under the Act -- to assist workers while they are participating in training -- is maintained while

allowing for reasonable exceptions under certain circumstances.

        Section 7 would expand the period for which a worker may continue to receive income

support during breaks in training. Currently, a worker may not receive income support during a

break in training if the break exceeds 14 days. This imposes hardships on certain workers,

particularly over the winter holidays. In addition, since training is increasingly being provided

through community colleges and other institutions with breaks scheduled longer than 14 days,

this ljmitation will be increasingly problematic. The amendment would extend the

break-in-training period to 30 days, which would generally accommodate training institution

schedules while preserving the linkage of income support under the program to participation in

training.

        Section 8 would provide a training cap for the consolidated program of$150 million.

Currently, the cap for the TAA program is $80 million and the NAFTA-TAA is $30 million.

The increase is intended to address the expansion of eligibility due to shifts in production, an

expected increase in the programs take-up rate due to the Department's administrative efforts to

expand outreach, and to account for the reduction in the number of training waivers expected

under the revised rules.

        Section 9 would    elimin~te   a quarterly report to the Congress on training expenditures.

The report appears to be of limited utility. The Department has been and will remain committed

to ensuring that Congress is fully informed regarding expenditures under the program, especially


                                                    19
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

        Section 10 provides for expanded coordination between the consolidated T AA program

and the dislocated worker program administered under the Job Training Partnership Act.

Specifically, section 10(a) provides that the coordination is to include common reporting systems

and elements, including elements relating to participant data and performance outcomes. This

information will signifiolHltly enhlHloe the aooountability of the oonsolidated program and

facilitate enhanced cooperation between and assessments of the two programs.

       In addition, section lO(b) provides that in ensuring workers are provided

employment-related services, the Secretary is to ensure such services include services at one-stop

career centers. These centers are being established throughout the country pursuant to

Department of Labor grants and will be an invaluable resource in providing information,

services, and referrals to T AA participants.

       Section 11 provides that the Seeretarv may authorize funds ullder this chapter to be llsed

to provide supportive services to enable eligible workers to participate in or complete training.

These services. such as tnmsportation and child care. may be critical to facilitating a workcr's

participation in traininQ and are authorized under JTPA training programs. While as under

current law this provision retains a requirement that the SecretarY attempt to arrange 1()r the

provision of these services bv other programs, it allows the Secretarv to authorize the use of

funds under this chaptcr to provide thesc services where such attempts are lin success filL

       Section 12 provides that the aQreement f()y administration of the program between the

State and the SecretarY is to include a requirement that the State repol1s pcrthrmanceinformation

that the SecretarY requests. At a minimum, this performance information is to include rates of


                                                 20
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

aner termination from the program. These performance measures are consistcnt witl} JTPA and

\vill sillnificantlv enhance the aceountabilitv under the consolidated 'T/\/\ prollram.

        Section D. provides that contingency funds are to be made available to the consolidated

T AA program if appropriated funds are exhausted in any fiscal year. I'his proyision does not

supersede and is subject to the $150 million cap on tmininQ expenditures. These funds are to be

made available from funds in the Treasury that are not otherwise appropriated and will ensure

that the commitment to provide assistance to adversely affected workers is not breached.

       Section 14 provides that the Secretary is to collect and maintain information identifvinll

t.he eOllntries to which production is shifted and. to the extent feasible. from which articles are

imported that result in certifications under tllis chapter and in the number of certitkations

relating to each such country. 'rhe provision qualifies the collection of informationQu,!mporti,

"to the extent feasible" because it is sometimes dimwit to identify the primarY source of

imported aliicies since such aJiicles may have components produced in several different

eOll.l1tries or may be transshipped among countries.    'These information collection requirements

will result in the availability of inf(mnation relating to certfieations based on shifts in production

to and imports from Mexico and Canada, which relating to the nl:1mber ofeertifieations issl:1ed

l:lllder da the eonsolidated TAA program that are based on the shift in prodl:1etion to Mexieo and

Canada and, to the extent feasible, on imports from those two eOl:1ntries. 81:1eh information

would be useful to the Congress and other policy makers in assessing the adequacy of the

consolidated program. It would also maintain a commitment to account for program activity

relating to trade with Mexico or Canada and would facilitate eligibility determinations for related


                                                  21
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

Investment Program.

        Section 15 would authorize appropriations of such sums as may be necessary for fiscal

years 1999-7003 for trade adjustment assistance for firms under chapter 3 of title II of the 'frade

Act of 1974, which is administered bv the Department of Commerce. This authorization period

is consistent with the authorization period /{)f trade adjustment assistance f()r workers under

chapter II that is provided in section 2 of this bill.

        Section lQ provides the effective date and transition provisions. Section 16(a) provides

that the provisions of the Act are to take effect on October 1, 1998. Section 16(b) authorizes the

Secretary to establish appropriate rules to facilitate or orderly transition from the separate T AA

and NAFTA-TAA programs to the consolidated program.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                    22               Hex-Dump Conversion
~ .. -   - ':=-ij.:



