                 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

                 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

                 CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUL-1998 12:12:38.00

                 SUBJECT:     Bond

                 TO: Jerold R. Mande ( CN;Jerold R. Mande/OU;OSTP/O;EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1 )
                 READ:UNKNOWN

                 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
                 READ: UNKNOWN

                 TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN;Cynthia Dailard/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
                 READ:UNKNOWN

                 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
                 READ:UNKNOWN

                 TEXT:
                 Bond's failure to support anti-tobacco legislation was a
                                 mistake

                                     By LAURA SCOTT - Assistant Editorial Page Editor
                                     Date: 07/08/98 22:00

                                     Sen. Kit Bond's vote against the national anti-tobacco
                 legislation
                                     may be the smoking cigarette of the 1998 U.S. Senate
                 campaign.

                                     Bond has not offered a credible reason for being against
                 this bill,
                                     particularly when he claimed that the issues bothering him
                 were high
                                     taxes and making lawyers rich.

                                     Most Americans realized quite clearly that the issue that
                 mattered
                                     was how to keep children from being tempted by cigarette
                                     manufacturers to start a habit that could lead to lung
                 cancer.

                                     That Kit Bond has been a friend of children during his
                 public service
                                     career is undeniable.

                                     The Missouri Republican has broken ranks with his own
                 party to get
                                     the Family and Medical Leave legislation passed and has
                 sponsored
                                     birth-defects prevention and early-childhood education
                 funding. He
                                     has turned the national spotlight on Missouri's widely
                 heralded
                                     Parents as Teachers program, which he fathered as
                 governor.

                                     But the Republican senator, who is seeking election to a


third term,
                stumbled badly when he voted against the tobacco
legislation, which
                was designed to curb the tobacco companies' propensity to
sell
                these killer drugs called cigarettes to children.

                  Bond led everyone to believe that he supported the
legislation.
                  When he failed to do that, he handed Democrat Attorney
General
                  Jay Nixon something to use against him in their expected
race for
                  the Senate in November.

                  Bond and his party have made Republicans appear willing to
trade
                  kids' health for tobacco money. Bond contends he no longer
takes
                  tobacco money, but a fair number of his GOP colleagues do.

                  The opportunity to discredit Bond's pro-child record now
is Jay
                  Nixon's for the taking, and Opportunity is Jay Nixon's
middle name.
                  (Or maybe it should be Opportunism.)

                  There is no one quicker to jump up with a press release or
press
                  conference if it means a chance to claim the spotlight. It
is certain
                  that Nixon will use this vote against Bond. On this issue,
Nixon will
                  be right and Bond will be wrong.

                  Nixon still will not be able to claim the Friend of
Children title,
                  though it doesn't appear he ever has tried to do that. A
rather large
                  constituency of child-care advocates in Missouri remember
him not
                  very fondly as the guy who put a stop to increased health
and safety
                  regulation for Missouri's religious child-care centers.

                  Generally, his record as the state's leading defender of
citizens has
                  been void of an emphasis on children. To draw a contrast,
on the
                  local level Jackson County Prosecutor Claire McCaskill has
made
                  children and domestic issues a focus of her office's
attention.

                  The tobacco legislation had its problems, including
numerous Senate
                  amendments. But the core of the bill remained intact.

                  Somewhat telling was Bond's objection to the legislation
because it
It.,   fM




                         didn't make children responsible for their own smoking. He
        wanted
                         sanctions against underage tobacco users.

                         Bond contended that the legislation wouldn't stop teen-age
        smoking
                         otherwise. That position looked to some people like he was
        letting
                         tobacco companies off the hook and putting the onus on
        kids.

                         Sen. John McCain, Arizona Republican who was the bill's
        chief
                         sponsor, refuted Bond's position by using tobacco company
        internal
                         documents. They warned that a steep increase in the price
        of
                         cigarettes would discourage smoking among the young.

                         Shortly before the tobacco bill came up in the Senate, Jay
        Nixon
                         lost his own tobacco war in Jefferson City.

                         Nixon championed legislation that would make the state's
        lawsuit
                         against the tobacco companies easier to win. At stake are
        millions of
                         dollars in Medicaid payments for tobacco-related illnesses
        for which
                         the state is seeking reimbursement. The trial is scheduled
        to start in
                         January 2000.

                         Tobacco lobbyists lined up in the Capitol halls to ply
        their winsome
                         ways with Missouri lawmakers and successfully killed the
        bill.

                         In Congress, Bond's vote helped Republicans to defend the
        tobacco
                         interests. In the state legislature, Republicans led the
        charge against
                         Nixon's attempt to even his odds against the tobacco
        interests.

                         Conspiracy-minded individuals might get an idea here. They
       would
                         be wrong. It is just politics as usual, with children's
        health in the
                         balance. Only this time the white knight wore black.

                         Scott is a member of the Editorial Board of The Star. Her
                         column appears on alternate Thursdays. Send e-mail to
                         lascott@kcstar.com.


