        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

        CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JUL-1998 18:15:24.00

        SUBJECT:   upcoming reproductive choice activity

        TO: Laura Emmett    CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        The schedule below is from Planned Parenthood.   I hear that Ag approps
        and possible RU-486 amendment in the Senate may occur Tuesday.


        ---------------------- Forwarded by Cynthia Dailard/OPD/EOP on 07/10/98
        06:13 PM ---------------------------



                clare_coleman @ ppfa.org
                07/10/98 07:11:04 PM
        Record Type: Record

        To: Cynthia Dailard/OPD/EOP
        cc:
        Subject: this week and next week




             Here's the update:

             Labor-HHS Appropriations -- HOUSE: Full Appropriations Committee
             mark-up is Tuesday, July 14. We expect Rep. Istook (R-OK) to offer an
             amendment on parental consent for Title X that is identical to the one
             Istook offered in 1997. We also may see amendments related to
             abortion provision in the Medicare+Choice program, as well as a
             broadly-drafted "anti-discrimination" amendment related to abortion
             provision.

             CCPA/Teen Endangerment Act -- HOUSE:  CCPA is listed on the House
             floor schedule for Wednesday, July 15. The Democratic motion to
             recommit is expected to deal with prohibiting coercion of a minor's
             abortion decision.  SENATE: The Senate Judiciary Committee mark-up is
             expected to resume Thursday, July 16, at which time pro-choice members
             will attempt to amend the bill.

             Treasury/Postal Appropriations -- SENATE: Full Appropriations
             Committee mark-up is Tuesday, July 14. We expect that Senator Reid
             (D-NV) will attempt to attach contraceptive coverage to the Federal
             Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) program. HOUSE: The bill may be on
             the floor on Thursday, July 16 or Friday, July 17.  It.is unclear


            whether an attempt to strike the Lowey provision adding contraceptive
            coverage to FEHB will be made or if Rep. Coburn (R-OK) will try to
            weaken the Lowey provision.  Rep. De Lauro (D-CT) will attempt to
            strike the abortion restriction in FEHB.

            OTHER IMPORTANT ACTION

            Foreign Operations Appropriations     HOUSE: Subcommittee mark-up of
            the FY 99 bill is Wednesday, July 15.  It is unclear how population
            programs will be funded.

            civil advocacy and the RICO statute -- HOUSE Crime Subcommittee
            hearing on the use of RICO in the court case NOW v. Scheidler on
            Friday, July 17.

            Ag Appropriations - SENATE: Floor consideration of this bill may be
            scheduled this week.   It is unclear if a restriction on the FDA's
            ability to approve mifepristone, similar to the provision in the House
            bill, will be offered.

            EPICC - Senate Labor and Human Resources hearing is scheduled for
            Tuesday, July 21.

            Ban on Abortion Procedures - HOUSE: An attempt to override President
            Clinton's veto of the so-called "Partial-Birth" Abortion Ban has been
            scheduled for the House floor on Thursday, July 23.  The unexpected
            scheduling of this override attempt was apparently in response to
            published reports of an incident in Arizona.

            According to news reports, on June 30, 1998, a physician at A-Z Clinic
            in Phoenix, Arizona, began an abortion on a 17-year old woman carrying
            a fetus estimated to be at 23 weeks.  As the procedure began, the
            doctor recognized that the fetus was significantly more mature than
            ultrasound appeared to indicate. A six-pound, two-ounce girl was
            delivered; the woman and baby were transferred to a local hospital.
            The baby had a fractured skull and facial lacerations. The identities
            of the woman and baby have remained confidential to date.   For more
            information about the incident, see the media alert emailed to
            affiliates on July 9, 1998.

            Following media reports on this incident, House sponsors of HR 1122,
            the so-called "Partial-Birth" Abortion Ban, announced that the House
            will attempt to override President Clinton's veto of HR 1122 on
            Thursday, July 23. There are sufficient votes in the House to obtain
            the two-thirds vote necessary to override a presidential veto.  Action
            in the Senate is not expected until after Labor Day.

            We have talking points on the Arizona incident prepared,   if you want
            them.
