RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 18:27:31.00

SUBJECT:   AFT Final

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: she sol ( shesol @ aol.com @ inet [ DEFAULT 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Final 07/17/98 6:00pm
Jeff She sol

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA
July 20, 1998

        Acknowledgments: Sec. Herman; Mayor Mark Morial; Members of Congress TK;
AFT President Sandy Feldman; Secretary-Treasurer Ed McElroy; newly elected
Executive VP Nat LaCour (also a member of WH Commission on Presidential
Scholars)

        I want to say a word about someone who is not here today, but who
is very much with us in spirit, and that is myoId friend Al Shanker.    I
know he would be proud of you on your 75th anniversary, proud that you are
continuing the lifelong fight he waged for excellence in education: for
high standards of achievement, high expectations for our children, and
high-quality teaching.  We are all grateful for the legacy he has left us,
and energized by the ideals he expressed so forcefully.


        This is a remarkable time in our nationD,s history: a time of
growth, of confidence, of prosperity. The American economy is the
strongest in a generation. Communities are coming together, strengthened
by a common bond of values and a renewed ethic of responsibility.  In a
powerful way, this respect for law and order and for one another is making
itself felt at almost every level of our society, sending crime rates
spiraling downward and making families, again, feel more secure. Today, I
want to talk to you about the ways we can instill this ethic of
responsibility and respect in everyone of our nationD,s public schools,
and in the lives of everyone of our children.

        This is a tremendous moment of possibility for our nationD,s
children. AmericaD,s prosperity presents us with a remarkable opportunity
-- and, therefore, an obligation -- to conquer many of the challenges we
have long faced as a nation. To meet that obligation, we must give our
children the tools they will need to succeed in new and changing times.
And by doing so, we will ensure that our own time, our age of opportunity,
is not remembered for the opportunities we missed.

        I know, as teachers, you believe in this possibility.  Your
unflagging faith in it drives you every day to broaden young minds, unlock
their potential, sharpen their skills.  It is a faith that sustains you
during long days in front of the chalkboard or over the keyboard, during
long nights grading papers and crafting lesson plans.

        For more than five years, our administration has worked to be a
strong, active partner in your efforts -- making schools safer, raising
standards in the basics for students and teachers, extending the
opportunities only a quality education can bring to every child.   In an
age of information and ideas, education must be AmericaD,s first
priority. That is why we have made the greatest investment in education
in our nationD,s history.  That is why weD,re working to modernize our
schools and connect every classroom to the Internet. And thatD,s why
weD,re working to end social promotion and reduce class size -- so
teachers can regain control and maintain discipline in their classrooms.

        If we are to expect more of our students, then we must also· ask
more of our teachers. Every effort, every reform, depends on
high-quality, highly-trained teachers. We must insist that teachers pass
competency tests before they set foot in our schools.  Those who fail
should not be licensed, and should not be hired.  Those who make the grade
should have more support -- for example, the guidance of a master
teacher. Teachers can and must take responsibility for their own --
mentoring, counseling, and reviewing one another.  This lesson of
responsibility is not lost on the AFT.  I salute President FeldmanD,s plan
to improve teacher quality and know your efforts will make a difference.

        Just as teachers are stepping up to their responsibility, Congress
must do the same, and put progress above partisanship.  That is how we
have helped more children learn to read, more teachers to be trained, and
more young people to go to college.  I am pleased that the congress is
moving forward with my proposals to help prepare teachers for the
classroom.  It is with this same spirit of progress we must move forward
today.

        I am confident we will maintain our momentum.  But you know and I
know that all our progress will come to naught if our schools are not safe
places, orderly places, where teachers can teach and children can learn.
We also know that in too many American schools, there is lawlessness where
there should be learning. There is chaos where there should be calm.

'.   There is disorder where there should be discipline.  Make no mistake: this
     is a threat not only to your classrooms, but to the strength and vitality 0
     f AmericaO,s public school system and, indeed, to the strength and
     vitality of our nation.

             It is a sobering fact that, in a recent study, 81 percent of
     teachers said it was the worst-behaved students who absorbed the most
     attention in schools. Not the struggling students, not the striving
     students, but the worst-behaved.  It is a dismaying fact that 71 percent
     of all high school students said there were too many disruptive students
     in their"classes -- and only 13 percent of public school students said
     their classmates were O&very respectful08 of teachers.  You know that
     teachers canO,t teach if they have to fight for respect or fear for their
     safety; that students canO,t study if there is disorder in the classroom;
     and that disruptive students wonO,t change if there are no clear, strict
     standards for behavior.

             We will have discipline in the classroom, or we will have disorder -- and
     danger. Hard experience has taught us this lesson, taught us well.   The
     problem is clear. The stakes could not be higher and the demand for
     action could not be more profound. As a nation, we must recognize that a
     return to order is central to the renewal of education in America.

             There is another lesson to be learned -- as teachers, I know you
     have a fondness for lessons -- in this case, itO,s from the overall
     decline in violent crime. Crime is dropping in this country because we
     are getting serious about punishment, and getting serious about
     prevention.  crime is dropping because entire communities are taking
     responsibility for their own streets and neighborhoods, and because the
     government is giving them the support they need. That is the idea behind
     community policing -- the 100,000 police we are putting on the streets.
     And when we assume responsibility, when we set tough new standards for
     behavior, something remarkable happens: people behave.

             That is why our administration is serious about school safety. We
     have seen, tragically and repeatedly, the damage done by troubled
     adolescents with a firearm in hand and violence in mind. So we have
     worked hard to tighten school security, to strengthen prevention, and to
     toughen penalties. We will continue to show zero tolerance toward guns in
     schools. During the 1996-1997 school year, our policy led to the
     expUlsion of nearly 6,100 law-breaking students and the prevention of
     countless acts of violence. And this fall, as I am announcing today, I
     will host the first-ever White House Conference on School Safety --
     bringing together not only experts and law enforcement officers, but also
     families whose lives have been touched by school violence. Together, we
     will continue the fight to find new solutions to this constant challenge.

             Congress, too, has an opportunity to protect AmericaO,s children
     by passing the juvenile crime bill I have proposed.  It will ban violent
     juveniles from buying guns for life and take other important steps.
     Congress can also give communities much-needed support: I have proposed
     that in our balanced budget, $95 million be allocated to the prevention of
     juvenile crime.  I urge Congress to step up to its responsibility, invest
     in prevention -- like the summer jobs program some are trying to eliminate
     -- and stop violent outbursts before they start.

             We have learned another lesson from the drop in violent crime.
     And that is: the small stuff matters.   In most schools, it is not the
     sensational acts of violence but the smaller acts of aggression -- the
     threats, the scuffles, the back-talk -- that take a t~rrible toll.  That


is why setting strict standards for behavior can and will make a
difference, as they are doing, all across America, in powerful and
inventive ways.

         Our first effort, of course, must be to get children inside the
schoolhouse doors.   Truancy, as I have said, is more than a warning sign
of trouble -- it is trouble, and a gateway to drugs, alcohol, gangs and
violence. Kids can either sit in class, or stand on the streets. They
can either learn from teachers, or learn from thugs.   It used to be that
truancy laws were enforced, that local police knew the kids and brought
them back to the schoolrooms, but that has long ceased to be the case.
But communities are again turning their attention to truancy.   In
Milwaukee, officers can now stop students on the street during school
hours.· And in Boston, where more than one quarter of public school
students were absent three weeks or more this past school year, they have
a strict new promotion policy: if you dono,t attend, you wono,t advance.
Other cities are forming truancy task forces -- a united front of schools,
social services and community police to keep children in school and out of
trouble.

        A teachero,s day must sometimes seem very long.   But we know that
the school day lasts a precious few hours and there is no time to waste.
So once kids are inside the schoolhouse door they must be free of fear and
free of distraction.   That is one of the ideas behind school uniforms.
When I spoke of school uniforms in my 1996 State of the Union Address, it
was an old idea without much new credence.   But in the years since, I have
been heartened to see an inundation of interest.   From New York City to Hou
ston, from Dade County to Chicago, school districts are adopting school
uniform policies and making sure that kids no longer kill other kids for a
pair of sneakers or a designer jacket; making sure students are focused
not on appearances but on learning. As a result, crime is going down in
these schools, and attendance is on the rise.

        But our responsibility cannot end with the words o&class
dismissed.oS After school, children can find their way into crime and
drugs or fall prey to it. Youth crime, it is no wonder, is at its peak
during those uns.upervised hours, 3: 00 to 6: 00. That is why I have called
on schools to remain open -- to become community learning centers where
children are not only safe but can continue to learn and grow.     I have
proposed, in my 1999 budget, a significant expansion in grants to schools
to create before- and after-school programs.     And for the later hours,
when the streets become darker and more dangerous, I have long urged that
communities follow the example of New Orleans, and put in place
community-based curfews.   ItO,s no wonder that youth crime is dropping
dramatically during curfew hours, or that cities from Denver to Chicago to
North Little Rock are adopting curfews --keeping children off the streets
and out of trouble, and giving parents a tool to impart respect and
responsibility.

        Anti-truancy efforts.   School uniforms. Character education.   Curfews.
These are not isolated initiatives.   Instead, they add up to a new
approach to restoring discipline in our schools and order in our
childreno,s lives.   Working together, learning from one another, America
can end an era of unruliness and install an ethic of responsibility in our
schools. We can make them places where students again learn not only the
three Ro,s but also respect, not only the great books but also good
behavior.  ItO,s as simple as the AFTo,s slogan: o&Responsibility.
Respect. Results.oS Thato,s a good formula for success, and a good
o&Lesson for Life.oS

·
            I am struck that just about every challenge we face is being met
    somewhere in some way by someone. And that is the way it should be.
    Today I calIon every community -- parents, teachers, and local school
    officials -- to adopt a set of standards for school discipline. The
    federal government will not make decisions for you, but will help you to
    make your decisions work. Government, as I have said, is not the
    solution. Nor is it the problem. At its best, government is a catalyst;
    a clearing house for new ideas; a partner in empowering citizens to make
    the most of their lives.

            Of course, as teachers, you understand as well as anyone that
    discipline begins not in the classroom, but at home.  That is where the
    first and most fundamental lessons for life are taught -- the difference
    between right and wrong, the values of responsibility and respect.   I know
    you will continue to do everything in your power to reinforce those
    values, and to teach our children new lessons -- about the wonders of the
    natural world, the riches of the human imagination.  And by teaching our
    children well, by doing what you do every day from the first bellO,s ring,
    you are building a better future for your students, and for our nation.

,-   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 18:04:22.00

     SUBJECT:   draft Q&A

     TO: Michael Cohen      CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP    @   EOP [ OPD 1. )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     As I was telling Jose', it's been hard getting used to AFT instead of
     ATF ...

     Please review.   Thanks.

     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D761ARMS10335530J.226 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504308050000010A02010000000205000000202C0000000200003B409662BDFD5B90016F15
     8744276ECA70C3F2F1539536A56C38F9A929FF3601951FBEA7BF7DCA41036404699EDB3CA03FA9
     D72CFFCB36EA8473600DF15525642B6CB522A462EDB15CDOBA2DD5749984F83C6C188E1A2C5FOE
     76A990217FE020C8BC5CC34COF7278DDC2B23F367884127493C7FOF28CC8506A9BA9BD3395A100
     1F09E77D22DBF9E5593D22A585F1F5AA628BA157DF8F3A384D8FAF9F04CDB63A70875E1F5427A2
     4C1D682AA48FE97CEC85FD56371B35FB7755C9BE1FC75FBB7D1875A549FA2F3488EB2A3410D7E9
     1D5EE23AB875196F7EAF13DAAB2AD96455FF4D016914CD54C8419B3753CC2B159BE851D3F2AB62
     A68162CD8DAE46672F979B1F1C96AOB6E45AED390C7E2BF64DC4E2F2870512DB5BB33941E738DB
     2D983FB13D64A7A9CF883986DDOEFDC0289376D019C0251BD42373DDD1935E520E82D7D3D3DF29

                            Speech to American Federation of Teachers
                                      Questions and Answers .
                                          July 20,1998
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
    School Discipline

    Q.     Do you know how many schools have school uniform policies in place?

    A.    While we do not have comprehensive data on the number of schools that have adopted
          uniform policies, we know that there has been a recent push by schools and school
          districts nationwide to adopt school uniform policies to improve student discipline,
          attendance, and school climate. Since President Clinton called on the Education
          Department to send out a guide on school uniform policies to every school district in the
          country in 1996, a large number of schools and school districts have adopted uniform
          policies:

           ·      The Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics estimates
                  that ofthe 3% of all public schools have mandatory uniform policies, 34%
                  initiated their policy in the 1996-97 school year.

          ·       The 1998 National Association of Elementary School Principals (NAESP) survey
                  of principals in 10 states shows that 11 % of elementary schools require uniforms,
                  and 15% are considering a policy. Almost two-thirds of schools with policies
                  adopted them in the last two years.

          Moreover, some of the nation's largest school districts have adopted school uniform
          policies, including: New York City, Dade County, San Antonio, Houston, Chicago and
          Boston. In New York City alone, this will mean 560,000 elementary school students in
          the nation's largest school system will have school uniforms by fall of 1999.


    Q.    How do you know if school uniforms are having an impact on school crime?

    A.    School uniforms have been identified as promising strategy to help make students safer
          while promoting discipline and respect in schools. Because ofthis, the Clinton
          Administration has encouraged schools to consider adopting school uniform policies.

          Since the trend is recent, there have not been any large-scale documented research results
          into the effectiveness of school uniforms. Perhaps the best and most publicized study
          comes from the Long Beach, CA School District's four-year school uniform policy -- the
          first large school district to require uniform system-wide in elementary and middle
          schools. Total crime -- including assault, fighting, robbery, and vandalism -- fell 76%
          between 1993 and 1997. More specifically, weapons offenses dropped 83% and
          vandalism was cut in half. In addition, in the 1995-96 school year, attendance hit an
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

      all-time high (94.7%). While the district does not attribute these impressive results
      solely to their school uniform policy, they believe that it has contributed to safer, better
      schools.


Q.    Is there any evidence to show youth curfews are having an impact on crime? .

A.    Last December, the U.S. Conference of Mayors released a 347-city survey of youth
      curfews. In the survey, 93% of cities reported that enforcing a curfew is a useful tool for
      police; more specifically, cities reported that curfews were a proactive way to combat
      youth violence as well as prevent juveniles from becoming crime victims. 88% of cities
      reported that curfews help to curb gang violence. All ofthe 72 cities that had a daytime
      curfew reported that it cut down on truancy.

      In May 1996, the Justice Department released a report by the Office of Juvenile Justice
      and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) on 7 jurisdictions with youth curfews in place. The
      report showed that when curfews backed by a community of support, and are part of a
      larger plan to help fight juvenile crime, they can play an important role in keeping our
      children safe. For instance, in New Orleans, a community-supported curfew --
      combined with summer jobs and recreational programs for youth -- helped cut juvenile
      crime during curfew hours the year after it was implemented.


Q.    Wasn't a study released earlier this year showing that they don't reduce crime?

A.    In June, the Justice Policy Institute released a study which looked at curfews in
      California. The study, which argues that curfew enforcement has not reduced youth crime
      in the state, has largely been criticized by California law enforcement officials, including
      the State Attorney General's office. Law enforcement officials across the State have
      stated that they have seen avery positive correlation between curfews, truancy laws and
      lower crime rates.

      President Clinton believes that useful tools such as curfews, school uniforms, and
      anti-truancy policies, can help schools and communities enhance youth discipline and
      reduce crime as part of a comprehensive plan to combat juvenile violence and crime.


White House Conference on School Safety

Q.    What can you tell us about the White House conference on school safety?

A.    In his speech today, the President will announce a White House Conference on School
      Safety, and proclaim October 15, 1998, National School Safety Day. The White House
      Conference will be linked by satellite to schools across the country and will specifically
      include the communities impacted by the recent wave of school shootings. Weare still

'.
                in the planning stages and will make details known as they are available.

          Recent School Shootings                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
          Q.    What are you doing about all of these school shootings?

          A.    This spring, the President sat down with youth violence experts -- from principals to
                parents to prosecutors -- to discuss what we can do at all levels to keep these tragedies
                from occurring in the first place. There was broad agreement that we should be focused
                on tackling the larger problem of youth violence. This is why the President continues
                to challenge the Congress to pass his strategy on youth violence to take on youth access to
                guns, tough punishment for violent youths and gangs, and provide additional adult
                supervision in the after school hours when violent juvenile crime is most likely to occur.

                Today's announcement of a White House Conference on School Safety will be an
                important step to focus on making schools safer for our kids. The President has already
                taken a number of actions to address the troubling series of school shootings, including:

                Early warning guide. Last month, the President directed the Secretary of Education and
                the Attorney General to develop a guide to help teachers and principals identify and
                respond to the early warning signs of troubled youth that can lead to school violence.
                The guide will be made available to schools nationwide when classes begin in the fall.

                First Annual Report on School Safety. In December, the President called for the
                development of an Annual Report on School Safety, which will be released on School
                Safety Day, October 15. The report will include: an analysis of all existing national
                school crime data and an overview of state and local crime reporting; examples of schools
                and strategies that are successfully reducing school violence, drug use, and class
                disruption; actions that parents can take locally to combat school crime, including a local
                safety checklist; and resources available to schools and communities to help create safe,
                disciplined, and drug-free schools.

                More Police in Schools. In March, the President announced funding for a new
                community policing program through the Justice Department's COPS Office focused on
                reducing violence on or near school grounds. The President later called on the Attorney
                General and Education Secretary to report back by the start ofthe school year on ways to
                provide even more police for our schools.

                Promoting Gun Safety and Responsibility. Earlier this month, President Clinton called
                on states to promote gun safety and responsibility by passing Child Access Prevention
                (CAP) laws that hold adults responsible ifthey allow children easy access to loaded
                firearms. Fifteen states have already enacted such CAP laws. A recent study published
                by the Journal of the American Medical Association found that CAP laws reduced fatal
                unintentional shootings by an average of23%.


