RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL          (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 08:55:23.00

SuBJECT:     Privacy options paper

TO: Elena Kagan        CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP                [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is the privacy options paper for the principals meeting on Monday,
July 20 at 11 am in the Roosevelt Room
---------------------- Forwarded by Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP on 07/17/98
08:55 AM ---------------------------




Thomas A. Kalil
07/16/98 10:11:14 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         Privacy options paper



principals meeting is Monday at 11:00 in the Roosevelt Room.

I will be out today and Friday -- but am pagable
1-800-SKYPAGE pin # 2168029

Thanks!




Message Sent
To:
Dav7i~d~W~.~B~e~i~e-r-/TO~V~P=-@=-~O~V=P~-----------------------------------------

Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP
Jim Kohlenberger/OVP @ OVP
Ira C. Magaziner/OPD/EOP
Bruce W. McConnell/OMB/EOP


Robert N. Weiner/WHO/EOP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4]MAIL466671006.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043DA100000010A02010000000205000000E8C4000000020000177646CEC006A4477CD6Al
502668AF9ABD44C32B3345D3A9D2DA88C789914E2BB04A4CCEDFADDA28F07780E015615918149B
14740EBCF3FF623BFBBC361B83FB349028D47194E326A93C2CE66DlBD820BB285874F5C99631F4
6BA6FCD42DDF526454915C39A4333A185D541129110AD7FFF5A67E6DABA43CBCCF10CB6A66A6EA

TO:       Sally Katzen                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
FROM:     Andrew Pincus

DATE:July 16, 1998

RE:       Privacy - Legislative and Other Proposals


        This memorandum outlines a series of Administration proposals for enhancing privacy
protection by acting in the following areas:

Federal Privacy Coordination Responsibility
On-Line Collection of Infonnation Generally (Commercial Marketing)
On~Line Collection ofInfonnation from Children
Government Infonnation
Medical Records
Financial Records
Profiling
Identity Theft/Theft of Personal Infonnation
Protection of New Categories of Personal Infonnation
Public Education

These initiatives would follow-up on those announced by the Vice President on May 14, 1998 in
his speech at New York University.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

                     FEDERAL PRIVACY COORDINATION RESPONSIBILITY

    Concerns about privacy are shared across agencies. Some privacy activities are undertaken
by many; others by no one. Early in the Administration, the President's Information
Ihfrastructure Task Force (IITF) solicited and received public comments on whether there should
be an entity within the executive branch to serve as a focal point for public and private sector
privacy issues. The IITF reached no conclusion. This proposal concludes that work and
responds in part to the July 1997 Presidential direction to develop recommendations as to the
appropriate role of government in privacy.

Proposal

    The President could assign coordination responsibility of privacy issues to the Administrator
of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) ofOMB. This assignment would
strengthen the ability of the Administration to develop and implement effective privacy policy.

    OMB recognizes that many agencies have expertise and responsibility for privacy in various
areas, however, additional focus on privacy across the executive branch would be useful. This
increased focus would be accomplished by the performance of four functions by OMB:

   Coordination - Assure that agencies address emerging privacy issues in their programs and
   policies, and promote greater consistency of Administration positions and policies.

   Advice - Drawing on agency expertise, provide advice on privacy policy questions to
   government agencies and the private sector.

   Representation - Explain and promote the Administration's privacy policy domestically and
   internationally.                                   .

   Consumer Information - Increase public awareness of privacy issues and the rights and
   responsibilities of consumers, industry, and government. Use the "bully pulpit" to
   encourage best practices and criticize bad actors.

     Rather than create a new privacy office or entity, it is more appropriate to assign these
functions to the Administrator of OIRA. Privacy concerns must usually be balanced with
competing values, such as prosecution of criminals, identifying "deadbeat" parents, free speech,
and the economic and commercial benefits that come from the free flow of information. OMB
is the traditional coordinator of policy, regulatory and organizational issues, while OIRA is
already responsible for other information policy matters and has expertise and authority in
privacy under the Privacy Act. OIRA, therefore, is a logical place to assign the new
responsibilities. To be an effective coordinator, additional resources would be required,
however, minimal resources are necessary since the proposed role is primarily coordination, not
operations.


                                                2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                            ONLINE COLLECTION OF INFORMATION

    Protection of privacy in the online environment was addressed in the Framework/or Global
Electronic Commerce released by the President on July 1, 1997. In that document, the
Administration reaffirmed the importance of "assur[ing] personal privacy in the networked
environment" and endorsed the Privacy Principles adopted in June 1995. The Administration
"support[ ed] private sector efforts now underway to implement meaningful, consumer-friendly,
self-regulatory privacy regimes." It cautioned that "[i]fprivacy concerns are not addressed by
industry through self-regulation and technology, the Administration will face increasing pressure
to playa more direct role in safeguarding consumer choice regarding privacy online."

    In the year since the issuance ofthe Framework, the privacy issue has garnered significant
public attention. The Administration has undertaken broad outreach efforts to urge industry to
take up the challenge of self-regulation. Numerous media stories have addressed the threat to
privacy in the online environment. And the Federal Trade Commission's net survey
demonstrated that -- as of March 1998 -- online enterprises were devoting insufficient attention
to privacy concerns.

    At the same time, there has been significant progress on industry self-regulation. On June
22, 1998 a group of 50 businesses and trade associations announced the formation of the Online
Privacy Alliance. The Alliance adopted well-received guideHnes for fair information practices
applicable across a range of industries, including the marketing industry. The Direct Marketing
Association, which represents over 3700 direct marketers, has endorsed the Alliance guidelines,
and committed to require DMA members to comply with the guidelines as a condition of
membership in the association.

    The Alliance guidelines require members to adopt and implement a policy for protecting the
privacy of individually identifiable information. An organization's privacy policy must be easy
to find and understand and must state clearly what information is being collected; the use of that
information; possible third party distribution of that information; the choices available to an
individual regarding collection, use and distribution of the collected information, as well as the
consequences, if any, of an individual's refusal to provide information. The policy should also
include a clear statement of the organization's accountability mechanism and information about
how to contact the organization if a problem or complaint arises. At a minimum, individuals
should be given the opportunity to opt out of uses that are unrelated to the purpose for which the
information was collected. The Alliance guidelines also require data collectors to take
appropriate steps to ensure the security, reliability and accuracy of personally identifiable
information.

    The Direct Marketing Association has imposed additional requirements specific to marketing
activities. These include a mandatory participation in the "Telephone Preference Service" and
the "Mail Preference Service" through which consumers can have their names placed on a
national "do not solicit" list.


                                                3
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

    The Alliance has committed itse1fto announce its approach to enforcement -- the final
element of its privacy protection program -- within the next ten days. Based on our
understanding ofthe likely ingredients of the enforcement approach, we believe the Alliance plan
will satisfy the Administration's privacy principles. The Alliance's membership constitutes
between 80 and 90 percent of online traffic.

    In addition, the Council of Better Business Bureaus (CBBB) announced on June 22, 1998,
that it will develop and implement a major privacy program through its subsidiary, BBBOnLine.
According to the CBBB press release, the online privacy program will feature: privacy
standard-setting, verification, monitoring and review, consumer dispute resolution, compliance
"seal", and educational components. The program is expected to "go live" in the fourth quarter
of 1998.

    TRUSTe is a not-far-profit organization based in the Silicon Valley. The TRUSTe program
provides notice by Web sites of their information practices, verification and oversight of the
claims made in the site's notice, and consumer recourse through which consumer complaints will
be resolved. TRUSTe has been criticized for its failure to require adherence to fair information
practices -- any practice is permitted, as long as it is disclosed. On June 24, 1998, however,
TRUSTe announced that it would require all new and renewing licensees to adhere to the privacy
guidelines announced by the Online Privacy Alliance.

Proposal

    The Administration should commend the members of the Online Privacy Alliance and other
groups for the progress on self-regulation. We should, however, make clear that substantial
challenges lie ahead. First, the privacy protections promised by these organizations must be
redeemed -- these new organizations must become functioning entities. Second, the private
sector must work to expand membership in self-regulatory organizations so that privacy
protection becomes ubiquitous in the online environment. Obviously the Administration will
also play an important role in this effort. We should repeat the caveat in the Framework that the
absence of continued real progress will cause the Administration to reexamine whether
government must take a more direct role in privacy protection.


                           ON-LINE INFORMATION ABOUT CHILDREN


    The solicitation of information from children presents a unique problem. Unlike adults,
children generally lack the ability to provide legally binding consent and may not be cognitively
capable of understanding the consequences of giving out personally identifiable information
online. Many companies presently collect information from children for a variety of reasons --
to contact a child to verify that they may have won a prize, to monitor children in chat rooms, for
statistical purposes or for direct marketing purposes.



                                                 4
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

    On June 4,1998, the Federal Trade Commission released a report to Congress, Privacy
Online, which surveyed 1,400 Web sites. Eighty-nine percent of children's sites surveyed
collect personal information from children. Although 54% of children's sites provide some
form of disclosure of their information practices, the Commission found that few sites take any
steps to provide for meaningful parental involvement in the process. They found that only 23%
of sites even direct children to seek parental permission before providing personal information.
Only 7% of the sites said they would notify parents of their infonnation practices, and less than
10 % provide for parental control over the collection and/or use of information from children.
The Commission recommended that Congress adopt legislation protecting children's privacy
online.

    Best Practices Model - Online Privacy Alliance

    On June 22, 1998 the Online Privacy Alliance issued specific guidelines for the protection of
children's' privacy online.

    Alliance members that operate sites directed at children under 13 have agreed (1) not to
collect online contact information from a child under 13 without prior parental consent or direct
parental notification of the nature and intended use of this infonnation, including an option for
the parent to prevent the use of the information and participation in the activity; (2) to assure that
information collected will only be used to directly respond to the child's request and will not be
used to recontact the child for other purposes without prior parental consent; (3) not to collect
individually identifiable offline contact information from children under 13 without prior
parental consent; (4) not to distribute to third parties any personally identifiable information
collected from a child under 13 without prior parental consent; (5) not to give children under 13
the ability to post or otherwise distribute individually identifiable contact information without
prior parental consent - sites directed to children under 13 must take best efforts to prohibit a
child from posting contact information; and (6) not to entice a child under 13 by the prospect of a
special game, prize or other activity, to divulge more information than is needed to participate in
that acti vi ty.

Proposal

    The Administration already has endorsed the FTC's call for legislation with respect to
protection of children's privacy in the online environment. The Administration should specify
that this legislation should set forth the fair information practices applicable to the collection of
information from children and grant the FTC authority to promulgate rules to implement these
standards. The grant of authority to the FTC could include a safe harbor provision -- data
collectors that belong to a self-regulatory organization that contains standards for collection of
data from children acceptable to the FTC would be presumed to be in compliance with the
statutory requirement and would not be subject to direct enforcement action by the FTC.




                                                  5
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

                                   GOVERNMENT INFORMATION

    Public records are a rich store of personal infonnation. Federal, state and local governments
require individuals to provide various types of infonnation and are usually required to make such
records available for public inspection. Public records include, but are not limited to real
property records, marriage and divorce records, birth and death certificates, driving records,
driver's licences, vehicle titles and registrations, civil and criminal court records, parole records,
postal service change-of-address records, voter registration records, bankruptcy and lien records,
incorporation records, worker's compensation claims, political contributions records, fireann
pennits, occupational and recreational licenses, filings pursuant to the Unifonn Commercial
Code and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

    These public records contain extensive and detailed information (e.g., race, gender, Social
Security numbers, addresses, dates of birth, marriage, and divorce.) Social Security numbers,
for example, are available from the records kept by dozens of government entities, such as motor
vehicle bureaus -- many driver's license records make the individual's SSN, as well as their
name, address, height, weight, eye color, gender, and date of birth available in one place. Dates
of birth may be available from birth certificate and voter registration records, and land records
typically include dates of sales, prices, size of mortgage amounts, and the property address and
description, as well as the seller's and purchaser's names.

    The U.S. Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. Section 552a (1988) protects individuals from
non-consensual government disclosure of confidential information. The Memorandum for Heads
of Executive Departments and Agencies, signed by the President on May 14, 1998, directs
agency heads to take specific action to assure that use of new infonnation technologies sustain
privacy protections provided by applicable statutes and that the infonnation is handled in full
compliance with the Privacy Act.

    While the U.S. Privacy Act restricts the disclosure of personal infonnation collected and
maintained by the Federal government, many States do not have analogous privacy laws. Not
only is the protection ofinfonnation collected and maintained by State governments governed by
an uneven patchwork of laws, but State freedom of information and public record laws, enacted
before powerful infonnation technology made collection and dissemination of infonnation easy
and efficient, allow many States to sell personal infonnation. State records are the source of
much of the personal information that, when disseminated, generates the greatest concern about
privacy protection.

    Issues around the collection, sharing and sale of personal infonnation gathered by States are
complicated by requirements under Federal law that States collect and provide certain
infonnation to the Federal government. These laws include transfer of infonnation for tax
purposes, to locate parents delinquent in their child support payments, and to detennine food
stamp and welfare eligibility.



                                                  6
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

    Any effort to restrict State collection and sharing of personal information will raise
significant federalism questions. For example, two states have successfully challenged the
Drivers Privacy Protection Act on federalism grounds.

   The Administration has already begun to address the issue of sharing of data by Federal
agencies with State, local, and tribal governments in the President's Memorandum to Heads of
Executive Departments and Agencies, signed on May 14, 1998.

Proposal

    The Administration should create a Federal-State Task Force to initiate a "privacy dialogue"
to analyze the privacy of personal information collected by governments. The dialogue could
include a study of the State laws that require the collection of personal information and the
Federal laws that require States to collect personal information and consider the desirability of:

    1. State enactment oflaws similar to the Privacy Act.

   2. Extension ofthe Privacy Act protections to Social Security numbers collected by State
      governments.

   3. Re-evaluation of the meaning of "public records" in light of new technology.

   4. A requirement that States redact Social Security numbers and other personally
      identifiable information from documents before they are placed in the public domain.

   5. An Executive Memorandum to State attorneys general reiterating obligations imposed by
      §7 of the Privacy Act with regard to the protections afforded the collection of Social
      Security numbers and the requisite notice requirements.



                          MEDICAL RECORDS/HEALTH INFORMATION

    The confidentiality of health information is a matter of widespread national concern, and the
protection of this information has been a priority of the Administration. On September 11,
1997, Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala recommended that Congress enact
Federal legislation to protect the confidentiality of health information by imposing duties on
those who hold such information and by providing rights to the subjects of the information. She
proposed that the Federal law provide a floor of protection, and that States be permitted to, in
addition, provide stronger protections.




                                                7
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


    Under the recommended legislation, health care providers, those who pay for health care, and
those who get information from those entities would have to pennit patients to see their own
records, to keep records of disclosures and let patients know who has seen their records, and to
permit patients to file proposals for correction of erroneous records: All entities collecting or
maintaining information would have to advise patients clearly of their confidentiality practices
and of the patients' rights.

    Disclosures would be limited to those authorized by the patient, or those specifically
permitted in the legislation, including disclosures for important public purposes, such as
treatment and payment, research, public health, oversight of the health care system, and use in
law enforcement or other legal proceedings if permitted by other law. There would be strict
limitations on further disclosure in many of these instances. Within an organization,
information could be used only for purposes reasonably related to the purposes for which it was
gathered, and all disclosures would have to be limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish
the purpose of the disclosure.

    Entities receiving information pursuant to patient authorization would have to give patients a
statement of their intended use of the information, and would be civilly liable for uses in
violation of that statement.

    There would be civil and criminal sanctions for violations, such as improper disclosure and
obtaining information under false pretenses.

   Congress is now considering the recommendations.

Legislative Proposal

    HHS will provide additional proposals for Executive action in the area of medical
recordslhealth information.

                                    FINANCIAL INFORMATION

    The recent increase in cross-industry corporate mergers raise irriportant privacy concerns with
regard to the treatment of consumer information shared by affiliated companies. Such mergers
may allow detailed and sometimes sensitive infoimation about consumers, including medical and
financial data, to be shared among newly related companies with relatively few restrictions. In
the case of the recent merger ofCiticorp and Travelers, for example, consumers might not
anticipate that providing information for insurance underwriting purposes to one entity might
later be used by the financial institution that is or becomes an affiliate.

    Each ofthe nations' largest 25 banks has a securities affiliate, and banks of all sizes sell
insurance. Affiliate information sharing already includes not only sharing of information for



                                                 8
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

marketing purposes (e.g., a credit card bank soliciting an affiliate broker-dealer's best customers
for a new platinum card) but also for security purposes (e.g., tracking a credit card holder's
spending patterns in order to detect immediately any unusual activity that might indicate fraud or
theft) and increasingly for risk-management purposes (e.g., a customer's record of payment on a
credit card apparently is quite useful in determining whether that customer is a good risk for auto
insurance). Such practices can be expected to continue, as the lines between various types of
financial services firms continue to blur and the firms continue to merge.

    The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) governs activities of agencies that furnish consumer
information to consumer reporting agencies and credit or "consumer" reports to third parties.
The FCRA defines a consumer reporting agency as a person or entity that regularly assembles or
evaluates consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of
furnishing consumer reports to third parties to be used as a factor in establishing the consumer's
eligibility for credit, insurance, employment purposes, etc.

    Companies that share consumer information with their affiliates are not subject generally to
the controls of the FCRA. This exemption was created in the 1996 Amendments to the FCRA.
The FTC raised concerns about exempting consumer information shared by affiliates from the
protections of the FCRA. The banking industry was strongly opposed to extending the FCRA
protections to consumer information shared by affiliates. In the end, affiliate sharing was
permitted, but customers were granted an explicit right to opt out of affiliate information sharing
of personal information other than "experience" or "transactional" information (which may be
shared not only with affiliates but also third parties). For example, a customer can prevent
personal information contained in an account application from being shared.

    The 1996 Amendments to the FCRA also contains an odd provision prohibiting the banking
agencies from examining for compliance with the Act; rather, they must await a complaint or
other indication of trouble. The banking regulatory agencies also are prevented from issuing
regulations under the Act, but the Federal Reserve may promulgate "interpretative" opinions in
consultation with the other agencies. These provisions were included in 1996 because of
banking industry concerns about regulatory burden, as part of the compromise that moved the bill
forward. Banks see the prohibition on compliance examinations as putting them on the same
footing as everyone else covered by the FCRA.

    The OCC, which regulates national banks, has announced its intention to review the
disclosure practices of national banks under the FCRA to ensure that the opt-out option is made
evident to consumers. The Federal Reserve expects to issue an interpretation of the 1996
Amendments some time this summer that would clarify for all banks what information may be
shared with affiliates and how specific and prominent each opt-out notice must be. Treasury has
met with the Fed, FDIC and OTS to encourage joint action in this area, and they appeared
receptive.




                                                 9
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposals

    a. The Administration could publicly prod action by national banks to make the opt-out
options and notices evident to consumers.

    b. The Administration could seek legislation repealing the exemption in the FCRA for
affiliate data sharing by financial services firms, or scaling it back -- e.g., permitting information
sharing for marketing purposes but not other purposes. (Sharing of the most sensitive type of
information -- medical information -- is already addressed above.) For example, businesses
could share consumer information among affiliates in connection with a credit card marketing
campaign, but consumer information provided for insurance underwriting purposes to one entity
could not be used by another entity to deny a person a loan without implicating the protections of
the FCRA. This proposal may appease the banking industry, which uses the information mainly
for marketing purposes, while still protecting the consumers. The FTC probably would support
such action.

Note: Action in this area must be taken cautiously. The 1996 Amendments were the product of
an intense, multi-year debate. Revisiting the affiliate sharing issue would most likely be
strongly opposed by the banking industry and may be a sensitive issue on the Hill.

    c. Authorize the appropriate agency to write enforceable rules in this area. Alternatively,
give this authority to each of the appropriate agencies to be exercised jointly.

   Study Proposals

    a. As more databases are available directly to companies, and companies themselves share
information directly, there is some concern that the FCRA may become outdated and obsolete.
Companies, for example, will no longer purchase credit reports from a central bureau, but rather
will obtain information directly from the individual sources and create their own internal credit
reports. In the absence of traditional credit reporting agencies, the protections of the FCRA
would evaporate. The Administration could undertake a study to determine whether the FCRA
contains the protections needed in the electronic age.

    b. The Administration could review whether the regulatory review process for mergers
should include a consumer protection analysis. For example, in addition to Justice Department
review of a proposed commercial merger, the regulating agency could review the proposed
merger to determine whether the merger negatively affects consumers' privacy.




                                                 10
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                            PROFILING


    Commercial "pro filers" build dossiers about individuals by aggregating information from a
variety of database sources, including public and non-public records. Individual reference
services, sometimes called look-up services, represent a sub-set of the profiling industry. These
services provide information that assists users in identifying individuals, locating individuals,
and verifying identities.

    Although profiling plainly has legitimate purposes, the public also has legitimate concerns
about the compilation of -- and access to -- dossiers that may contain a great deal of personal
information about a given individual.

   Best Practices Model - Individual Reference Services Group

    On December 17, 1997, a group of 14 Individual Reference Services (the Individual
Reference Services Group, lRSG) entered into a agreement on privacy practices which was
submitted to the Federal Trade Commission. The lRSG program is based on compliance with
certain principles, including notice, disclosure, choice, security, and public education. lRSG
members agreed to acquire personal information only from reputable sources, to exclude
marketing information as a source, to take reasonable steps to assure that data collected is
accurate, complete and timely for the purpose for which it will be used, to correct non-pUblic
records when appropriate, and to limit distribution of non-pUblic information to subscribers with
appropriate intended uses.

    The lRSG committed to implement a rigorous enforcement compliance method. The
enforcement program has two prongs. First, signatories' practices are subject to review by a
"reasonably qualified independent professional service." On the basis of established criteria, that
entity determines whether a signatory is in compliance with IRSG principles. The results of the
annual review are made pUblic. Second, signatories who are information suppliers may not sell
information to look-up services that do not comply with the IRSG principles.

    The lRSG members agreed to provide individuals with access to information contained in
services and products that specifically identify them, unless the information comes from a public
record, in which case the companies will provide the individuals with guidance on how they can
obtain the information from the original source. The FTC strongly disagreed with the limitation
on the access provisions of the lRSG practices, and the Commission and lRSG agreed to allow
18 months before revisiting the access issue. On the basis ofthe lRSG program and the
commitment to review access issues, the FTC advised the Congress that legislation on individual
reference services was premature.




                                                II
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposal

    The IRSG agreement is a good start, but it only covers one category of business involving the
compilation of personal information -- traditional "look up" services like those offered by
Lexis-Nexis. Other types of entities purchase information from one or more sources to create
profiles. For example, some companies are in the business of compiling profiles and reselling
them to industry users. Private investigatiQn firms sell identifying and background information
collected from public records, interviews, and other investigatory sources. Public records
resellers sell public record information like driving and criminal records. List brokers like
Metromail gather information in the aggregate from marketing transactions and rent the
information typically used for marketing purposes.

     The Administration should announce an effort, in conjunction with the FTC, to encourage
these other types of entities to adopt self-regulatory principles analogous to those adopted by the
IRSG and tailored to their lin'e of business. (Private sector entities that create profiles based on
information they collect themselves would be covered by the online privacy self-regulatory.
initiative discussed above.) The Adminstration could point out that addressing this issue is
important to give individuals the security they need to do business in both the off-line and the
on-line environment and that, as with online privacy generally, if the private sector fails to
address the issue, the Administration will have to consider whether more direct government
intervention is appropriate.


                                         IDENTITY THEFT

    The term Aidentity tbeft@ generally refers to the fraudulent use of another person's identity
to facilitate the commission of a crime, such as credit card fraud. The criminal gathers
information about a person and then uses the information to adopt the identity of a victim. The
Secret Services reports that this type of offense is growing rapidly, and the victims have been the
focus of intense media and Congressional interest.

    Under existing law, identity theft offenses are clearly punishable to the extent that they
include identification documents (i.e., forged or stolen documents) and an intent to defraud the
United States. In other cases, however, there may be gaps in federal or state law that would
permit or provide only minimal punishment for the practice.

    Thus, it would be helpful to change the law to recognize the potential harm that could be
done by offenders who commit identity theft with means of identification, and to address other
problems that have emerged as a result of a dramatic increase in cases of identity theft. At the
same time, legislation to criminalize identity theft must be carefully crafted to avoid problems
that could arise from the federalization of a large new class of crimes.




                                                 12
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

   Last week, Senator Kyl marked up his bill, S. 512, the Identity Theft and Assumption
Deterrence Act of 1997. After raising initial concerns about the breadth of the bill, the
Departments of Treasury and Justice worked with Kyl to produce a more narrowly focused bill.

    Legislative Proposal

    a. Assuming that the Kyl bill meets remaining Adminstration concerns, the Administration
could endorse the Kyl bill, and work publicly with Senator Kyl and the banking industry (which
strongly supports the bill) to see it enacted.

    b. Merchants require check-writers to provide proper identification, which often includes a
driver's license or other identification card with a social security number. Usually a merchant
will record the identifying number onto the check to provide proof of the verification activity.
This simple action can create a ream of problems. As a result of this activity, a person's check,
which contains a person's name, address, and bank account number, now also contains the
individual's social security number. By linking these pieces of personal information together on
a single check a merchant has made this customer an even better target for identity theft.

     The Administration could seek legislation that makes it illegal to record social security
numbers on a check that is being approved for a purchase. This would mirror a law that was
passed several years ago that prohibited the recording of a credit card number onto a check when
the credit card was used as a piece of identification. Such legislation would neither make it
illegal for a merchant to ask for the identification, nor indicate that such a check occurred. The
law would merely prohibit writing the actual social security number on the check. Note,
however, that modem "telecheck" technology permits merchants to ensure that a personal check
is good without a Social Security number.


                               THEFT OF PERSONAL INFORMATION


    Recent media reports and Chairman Leach have highlighted a problem related to identity
theft, where an offender obtains information illegally but then uses it for a legal purpose -- e.g.,
pretends to be a customer in order to trick confidential infonnation out of a bank, and then sells
that information to a private investigator, perhaps in a divorce case involving the customer.

Option

   Chairman Leach will be floating a bill this week to address this problem, and will hold
hearings on July 28 in the Banking Committee. At this point, we do not know what the bill will
contain, though his staff has promised to provide Treasury a copy as soon as it clears Legislative
Counsel. If the bill is acceptable, the Administration could support the bill, and package the
support with the Kyl "identity theft" bill.



                                                 13
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

                   PROTECTION OF NEW TYPES OF PERSONAL INFORMATION

    The use of Social Security number by the private sector in connection with a variety of
transactions allows profilers, marketers and others to combine discrete bits of information to
create a portrait of an individual. These portraits have legitimate uses -- law enforcement, credit
assessments, debt collection, etc. -- and we therefore must tread cautiously to avoid upsetting an
information structure that is fairly well established. The FTC recently indicated to Congress that
the use of a unique identifier like Social Security numbers may contribute significantly to the
accuracy of these portraits. In addition, the FTC indicated that "the cat may be out of the bag"
with respect to private sector use of social security numbers.                       .

    Section 7 ofthe Privacy Act makes it unlawful for any Federal, State or local government
agency to deny to any individual any right, benefit, or privilege provided by law because of such
individual's refusal to disclose his social security account number. The Act provides an
exception that permits Federal, State or local governments to request disclosure of an
individual's social security number. In such cases, the Act requires notice of whether the
disclosure is mandatory or voluntary, by what statutory or other authority such number is
solicited, and what uses will be made of it.

    It seems unlikely that anything can be done with respect to limiting the use of social security
numbers by the private sector -- they have become ubiquitous and any limitation could have
significant economic implication. On the other hand, as technology provides new means of
identification, such as biometrics, it is important to consider how to give individuals more
control over these new categories of identifying information.

Proposal

    The Administration could undertake a study (with or without public announcement) to
determine whether any steps are necessary to allow individuals to exercise more control over the
information that is relevant to new identification technologies.


                                       PUBLIC EDUCATION

    The U.S. approach to privacy focuses on choice - individuals should have the choice to
protect or disclose most personal information. Many Americans are unaware of how their
personal information is used, and they do not understand how to protect themselves or exercise
their ability to choose. Likewise, many businesses are unaware of consumer concerns about
privacy and have not thought through their information handling practices in light of this
concern.




                                                14

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
    Proposal

        The Administration could identify private sector partners to develop an advertising campaign
    to inform individuals about how to exercise choice with respect to the collection and
    dissemination of their personally identifiable information. Such a campaign could include all
    advertising mediums - radio, television, print, and electronic.




                                                  15
'"
