.RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:27-JUL-1998 11:48:03.00

 SUBJECT:     FYI from National Council on Disability to Chuck Ruff

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 The issues Marca raises to Ruff are not ones we are looking to be out
 front on publicly.

 M E M 0 RAN DUM



 TO:                Charles F. C. Ruff
                    Counsel to the President

 FROM:      Marca Bristo
                   Chairperson, National Council on Disability

RE:             Congressional Attacks on civil Rights Laws for People
with Disabilities

DATE:       July 24, 1998

CC:             Minyon Moore, Assistant to the President and Director
of Public Liaison


Minyon Moore suggested that I be in touch with you regarding ongoing
Congressional efforts to undermine three critical laws that protect the
civil rights of people with disabilities, the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA), the Rehabilitation Act,  and the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA). As a long-term adviser to the President on
disability issues, I want to call your attention to these threats in the
hope that you can help shore up Administration support for opposing any
weakening amendments to civil rights laws.



On Sunday, we will celebrate the eighth anniversary of the signing of the
ADA, and it is critical that the President and this Administration
continue to support this ground breaking law and oppose any attempts to
weaken it.  The anniversary may focus attention on the issues raised in
this letter for the press. Recently, Senators Thurmond and Helms
introduced legislation in the Senate that would amend the ADA and the
Rehabilitation Act to eliminate the protections these laws afford to
people in prison, including prison employees.

This proposed legislation, the O&State and Local Prison Relief Act 8 (S.
2266), is a response to the Supreme CourtO,s unanimous decision this term
in Pennsylvania Department of Corrections v. Yeskey, which held that Title
II of the ADA does apply to state and local prison facilities.   I
recognize that the civil rights of prisoners and prison employees with
disabilities may not be an issue of great concern to many voters, but I
want to emphasize that any amendment to the civil rights protections in
the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act would be considered unacceptable by the
leadership of the disability community.   The Administration supported the
application of the ADA to state and local prisons in its brief in the
Yes key case, and I am hopeful that the President will oppose and veto if
necessary any legislation that would amend the ADA in this area.

In a related vein, Congressmen Livingston and Riggs and others have been
working to weaken the protections provided to children with disabilities
in IDEA.  Under IDEA, just reauthorized last year, children with
disabilities are entitled to a free and appropriate public education in
the least restrictive environment consistent with their educational
success from birth until they turn 22.  Congressman Riggs has attached
language to the House appropriations bill for the Department of Education
that would remove this entitlement for some youth over age 18 who are in
adult prison facilities.

 In a separate amendment to the same appropriations bill, Congressman
Livingston seeks to dramatically expand the ability of public schools to
remove undesirable students with disabilities from the classroom without
having to go through due process procedures. The most recent
reauthorization of IDEA, signed by the President just last year, already
includes a compromise on the contentious issue of discipline that expanded
the ability of schools to remove children with disabilities from the
classroom when they bring a weapon or drugs to school.  Congressman
Livingston and others are dissatisfied with the bipartisan compromise on
discipline and are trying to reopen this thorny issue in the context of
the appropriations process.

Parents of children with disabilities are fighting hard to hold the line
on IDEA, but they may need a veto from the President if the Riggs,
Livingston, or other amendments make it through the Congress.  Secretary
Riley has fought hard to protect students with disabilities and not to
reopen the issue of school discipline in this Congress.  When the
President hosts the White House conference on School Safety in the fall,
it would not be surprising for educators, particularly school boards, to
fight for more O&flexibility08 in IDEA so that schools can more easily
expel O&unruly08 children from the classroom.  It is critical that the
President not succumb to the push for more flexibility on discipline,
which will translate into even more children with disabilities leaving
school early without the skills they need to live independently and pursue
meaningful careers.

As a disabled Clinton appointee,   I see the most recent attacks on ADA,   the
·
    Rehabilitation Act, and IDEA as related and highly partisan.  Civil rights
    protections for people with disabilities are not well understood and
    easily mischaracterized by opponents.  If Congress is successful in
    weakening any of these laws before they go home, we can count on more
    attempts to chip away at the federal protections offered children and
    adults with disabilities in the next Congress.  I am hoping that you will
    be an advocate for the President to continue to hold the line on these
    civil rights laws, even if it means expending some political capital to do
    it. Given the PresidentO,s strong civil rights record on disability
    issues, I am confident that he will fight attempts to weaken federal civil
    rights protections for children and adults with disabilities.

    I am going to be in town on Wednesday, July 29 for a meeting with the
    President and the Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities,
    and would love an opportunity to meet with you if your schedule permits.
    I will be in touch to see if we can arrange a meeting.  If we cannot get
    together next week, I hope we will have an opportunity in the near
    future.  Thank you for your attention to these matters.


