RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JUL-1998 12:46:46.00

SUBJECT:   DED for Liberians

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN;Cathy R. Mays/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce/Elena:
Yesterday, NSC hosted a meeting with DOJ and the State Department to
discuss recent requests by refugee and Liberian advocacy groups for the
President to direct the Attorney General to employ DED (Deferred Enforced
Departure) for Liberians.

As you recall, last winter the President directed the Attorney General and
the INS to defer for one year the deportation of Haitians who were paroled
into the U.S. or applied for asylum prior to Dec. 31, 1995. At that time,
the NSC and the State Dept. concluded that there were strong foreign
policy reasons not to send large numbers of Haitians (approximately
40,000) back to the country. This conclusion was supported by
committments by the Administration and members of Congress (at the urging
of Haitian President Rene Preval) to work on providing a legislative
solution for these Haitians within the year.

The situation for Liberians is very different.   First, the State
Department has concluded that though the economic situation in Liberia is
bad, the country is politically stable .. In fact, the U.S. is funding a
UNHCR (United Nations High Commission on Refugees) effort to facilitate
the return of approximately 480,000 Liberians from other countries
(non-U.S.) back to Liberia (the population of Liberia is now approximately
4 million).  In addition, many Liberians from around the world are
voluntarity repatriating.  There are a total of 8,000 Liberians in this
country who would be affected by this DED.   Of course, some number of the
Liberians in this country are political asylees.   Like other asylum
seekers, if they have a credible fear of persecution based on a covered
category (political activities, religious beliefs, etc.) they would be
eligible for asylum (DOJ tells us that the approval rate for Liberians
seeking asylum is approx. 80%).

Given all of these factors, there does not seem to be a credible basis for
the President to use his extraordinary authority to grant DED for this
small population of Liberians -- particularly in light of U.S. support for
the repatriation of hundreds of thousands of Liberians from other
countries. The DOJ and State appear to agree with this view.   NSC's
position is not clear, though Scott B. seems inclined to advocate for DED.

The one complication here is that Jesse Jackson was recently in Liberia,


and he may ask that the President issue DED for Liberians (this issue has
been brought to his attention by advocacy groups) .   Howard Jeter
 (Director of West African Affairs at the State Dept. and Jackson's
travelling companion last week in Liberia) indicated that he would brief
Jackson on the situation and get his reaction. According to Scott B.,
Berger wants to respond to the letters that he received on this issue by
the end of next week.

julie


