RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JUL-1998 15:17:15.00

SUBJECT:     NGA Press Release on Welfare' Reform's Second Year

TO: William H. White Jr.       ( CN=william H. White Jr./OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Fred DuVal ( CN=Fred DuVal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's NGA Press Release. Looks positive. No mention of any specific
policy issues, just a general call that  "Congress and the president
uphold the historic welfare agreement reached in 1996 and reject any cuts
and reduced flexibility in welfare or Medicaid." They released 4
reports on welfare reform as well (see Summary of Publications below),
the largest of which we did a weekly item on and HHS did a press release
about.


http://www.nga.org/Releases/PR-28July1998WelfareReform.htm

Contact:
           Becky Fleischauer

             202/624-5364


     GOVERNORS REFLECT ON WELFARE REFORMO,S SECOND YEARO*

     "Pace and Success Far Exceed Expectations of proponents and Skeptics
Alike"

     Washington, D.C. 0) Reflecting on the welfare lawO,s second year, the
nationO,s governors
     hailed the pace and initial success of welfare reform, declaring that
it had "far exceeded
     expectations of proponents and skeptics alike." The governors warned
that continued
     traction in this steady climb of progress depends on a solid
federal-state partnership.



      "The nationO,s governors ushered in a new era of responsibility and a
new vision for achieving
     independence through work," said NGA Chairman Ohio Gov. George V.
Voinovich and Vic~
     Chairman Delaware Gov. Thomas R. Carper. "Governors played a key role
in getting the
     welfare law passed, and we continue to demonstrate our leadership in
making this law
     work. We urge in the. strongest possible terms that Congress and the
president uphold the
     historic welfare agreement reached in 1996 and reject any cuts and
reduced flexibility in
     welfare or Medicaid. States have transformed welfare, lifting
millions to independence and
     self-sufficiency. Governors hope and expect to continue this
partnership " which is making
     our success possible."

     Since the 1996 enactment of the welfare law and the new flexibility
and innovation made
     possible in its Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block
grant, the number of
     individuals on welfare in the U.S. has dropped 27 percent. According
to several reports
     governors released at a news conference today, the flexibility in the
new law has unleashed
     a host of innovative approaches to help welfare recipients find jobs
and succeed in their
     work.

     A Race to the Top

     AmericaO,s governors are steering a welfare reform course toward work
and independence
     that includes engaging communities and the private sector to help
meet the challenges of
     moving people from welfare to work. Governors are providing assis
tance with transportation
     to expand access to work, and increased child care to support working
families.

     As caseloads decline, states are shifting spending from providing
cash assistance to
     investing in the supports to fortify working families and fortify
them for continued success
     on the job. Although nationwide case loads decreased by nearly one
third, overall state
     spending on welfare efforts has increased. States are spending
significantly more on child
     care and services to help people find and keep a job. State spending
for child care
     increased by more than 50 percent; spending on efforts to help
welfare recipients succeed
     at work increased by more than 30 percent. This action refutes
predictions of a "race to the
     bottom" among states.

     Accessible, quality, child care and transportation are two pillars of
work stability that are


     fundamental to successful welfare reform. States are spearheading
child care initiatives that
     provide affordable, accessible child care during various work shifts.
At least 10 states are
     ensuring child care for all working poor families below a specified
income level.

     In addition, many jobs are not accessible by public transportation,
particularly jobs in rural
     or suburban areas or jobs during nonstandard work hours. States are
working with state
     and local transportation agencies to redesign public transportation
routes and schedules to
     better accommodate reverse commutes and alternate work schedules.
States are also
     using the flexibility provided under TANF for a variety of
innovations, such as contracting for
     shuttles or buses; providing loans to families to purchase used cars;
and training recipients
     to operate their own shuttle companies.

     The flexibility of the two-year-old welfare law is allowing states to
change the way they do
     busin~ss. More than ever, governors are focusing on results in
pay-for-performance
     contracts with private and nonprofit organizations, in their rela
tionships with local
     governments, and as they compete for the TANF bonus dollars that will
be awarded based
     on job placement, retention, and earnings.

     Taking Stock

     The approaching two-year anniversary of the welfare reform law and
the dramatic drop in
     welfare rolls have spurred states to research what happens to former
welfare recipients
     when they leave welfare. Reductions in caseloads are not the only
measure of success for
     governorsO*states also must look at the number of recipients and
former recipients who are
     working, the types of jobs they are getting, and whether their
families are better off.

     Thirty-two states have efforts underway or plans to follow up on
individuals leaving welfare to
     try to answer these questions. These studies will give governors an
indication of how well
     welfare reforms are working and whether changes need to be made.
Studies in nine states
     found that from 50 percent to 60 percent of recipients who leave
welfare for work find
     jobs--generally paying between $5.50 and $7.00 an hour. Based on
information gleaned
     from followup studies, governors are turning their attention to
making sure that these
     individuals stay employed and move on to better jobs.

     Increasingly, state welfare reform efforts are becoming part of a
broader strategy to support


     the working poor and make work more attractive than welfare. Eleven
states have adopted
     their own earned income tax credits for low-wage workers.

     States are also focusing on efforts to prevent dependence on welfare
by providing
     alternatives to joining the welfare rolls. Under TANF, 22 states
adopted programs that help
     people find jobs or provide the supports needed for individuals to
work, such as child care,
     transportation, and medical careD*to help them avoid welfare. Some
states provide lump
     sum cash payments to individuals that can be used for car repairs,
paying rent to prevent
     eviction and homelessness, and purchasing tools or uniforms.

     Sustaining the Momentum
                  ,
     When welfare recipients move into the workforce, they confront the
challenges that many
     low-wage workers face. In the next phase of welfare reform, governors
will be focusing on
     the "hard-to-place." As caseloads continue to decrease, a growing
portion of those who
     remain on the rolls must overcome significant challenges if they are
to succeed in the
     workplace. These include low basic skills, alcohol or substance
abuse, chronic health
     problems, and learning disabilities. Time limits on benefits and
stringent work requirements
     increase the urgency for states to find approaches that move these
individuals into the
     workplace. States are tackling this challenge by developing more
effective assessment
     tools, providing more intensive case management services, linking
with a variety of public
     and nonprofit community service providers, and developing
transitional work experience
     opportunities that combine work-based education and skills training.
States are also
     focusing on noncustodial parents, helping them find work and training
so they can better
     meet their child support obligations.

     Although many recipients leave welfare for work, their tenure in the
workplace is too often
     short-lived. Lack of understanding about workplace behavior, problems
with child care and
     transportation, and the unstable nature of the low-skilled labor
market all factor into job
     loss. Thus, a second major challenge for states is to help welfare
recipients stay
     employed, build a work history, and advance to higher-skilled, better
paying jobs. Job
     retention services such as extended case management, mentoring,
easier access to
     supportive services, and work-based education and training to help
people advance on the
     job, are increasingly on the menu of services for welfare recipients
and former welfare


     recipients.

     "Governors are proving that welfare reform has sparked a race to the
top, fueled by
     innovative state strategies designed to help welfare recipients find
and keep jobs," said
     Govs. Voinovich and Carper. "Now, as we face some of the most diffi
cult challenges in
     completing reforms to restore dignity through work and independence,
we will intensify our
     efforts and galvanize the federal-state partnership that is
supporting our success to date."

     The governorsD, bipartisan welfare reform policy, forged at an NGA
meeting in 1996, provided
     the catalyst for the passage of historic welfare reform legislation.
When governors convene
     in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, next week for their 90th annual meeting,
they wi·ll spotlight
     initiatives for improving services for children in working families.

                                       D*ENDD*


SUMMARY OF PUBLICATIONS

                          Working Out of Poverty: Employment Retention and
Career
                        Advancement for Welfare Recipients

                        This report covers understanding the changing
environment for
                        recipients making the transition from welfare to
work; helping welfare
                        recipients stay employed and increase their wages and
                        advancement opportunities; and using transitional
.employment as a
                      career development strategy. Copies of this
publication are available
                      at no charge by calling NGA at 202/624-5338.

                               Stategies to Promote Education, Skill
Development, and
                        Career Advancement Opportunities for Low-Skilled
Workers

                        The changing labor market and welfare system have
generated
                        considerable interest in developing work-based
training and career
                        advancement opportunities for low-skilled workers.
This StateLine
                        summarizes the labor market trends affecting these
workers,
                        outlines new research findings, and highlights five
promising state
                        and local programs to promote skill development and
career
                        advancement.


                              preparing Youth for the Workforce under
Welfare Reform

                       The advent of welfare reform in 1996 promised to
significantly alter
                       the safety net for some of the most at-risk segments
of the youth
                       population. This· StateLine suggests that state
efforts to reduce
                       welfare dependency should address the workforce
preparation and
                       youth development needs of this population. State
initiatives should
                       also include specific programmatic elements that are
recommended
                       by the relevant research but that are not often
components of
                       conventional youth programs.

                              Serving Welfare Recipients with Learning
Disabilities in a
                       "Work First" Environment

                       This Issue Brief examines strategies that states can
use to help
                       welfare recipients with learning disabilities move
toward
                       self-sufficiency within the context of welfare
reform. It defines a
                      learning disability; explains approaches to
identifying and assessing
                      undiagnosed learning disabilities; and suggests ways
to secure
                      accommodations for training, testing, and
functioning in the
                      workplace.


