RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JUL-1998 14:32:36.00

SUBJECT:   HHS Press Release on NGA welfare reform report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's the release we encouraged HHS to do.      It's not the best written
one I've seen.


HHS NEWS
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                      Contact:   Michael Kharfen
Tuesday, July 28, 1998                                         (202 )
401-9215


REPORT RECOMMENDS STATE WELFARE REFORM STRATEGIES

        HHS Secretary Donna E. Shalala today joined the National Governors
Association (NGA) in releasing a report providing recommendations and
models to help states design welfare-to-work programs to emphasize jobs for
welfare recipients that will last and pay more.

         The report, "Working Out of Poverty:  Employment Retention and
Career
Advancement for Welfare Recipients," prepared by the NGA Center for Best
Practices with funding from HHS, examines some of the lessons learned from
research and identifies promising state welfare-to-work strategies.   For
successful programs,   the report concludes, states need to assess where
jobs are available, work with employers on their needs for reliable
workers,
 enhance job retention by securing support services for the new workers,
and explore careers that offer wage advancement.

        "The Clinton administration is committed to making welfare reform a
success. We measure that success in large part by parents on welfare
getting, keeping and earning more in jobs," said Secretary Shalala.    "This
report, prepared by the NGA at the request of HHS, offers strong principles
and innovative programs that states are doing effectively now."

        As many welfare recipients leave the rolls, a key challenge for
states
is ensuring that they have stable employment so they won't come back.
States are likely to be most successful at promoting job retention and
career advancement if they respond to both the needs of recipients and
"

    employers, the report concludes.  The report also outlines several
    approaches for states to consider to promote job retention among newly
    hired welfare recipients including: ongoing case management to help
    participants navigate the workplace, household problems, and the social
    service network; effective mentoring programs; supportive short-term
    payments or loans for -emergency' situations that might otherwise lead to
    job loss and reliance on welfare; improved access to support services, such
    as child care, transportation, health care, and housing; and expanded use
    of federal and state earned income tax credits to make work pay.   It also
    urges states to promote career advancement among welfare recipients by
    changing the design of government-sponsored job skill development programs
    to reflect a strong "Work First" orientation, improve the access to
    education and training outside of work, promote learning at the workplace,
    and help workers access career ladders.

            "We know from HHS and NGA reports that states have started to make
    the
    investment in the critical supports for welfare reform to succeed, such as
    child care, transportation and on-the-job




    - More -


    - 2 -




    training, and build partnerships with private employers, but more needs to
    be done," said Olivia A. Golden, HHS assistant secretary for children and
    families.   "The greatest challenge for states is to help those parents with
    the hardest obstacles for employment to have the opportunity for
    self-sufficiency by using all available resources, such as the Department
    of Labor's Welfare to Work grants, Access to Jobs Initiative and state
    funds."

            "This report offers creative strategies and promising programs that
    can help states compete for the new High Performance Bonus.  This bonus to
    states that move more recipients into jobs, retain jobs and earn more will
    be awarded to the states for the first time this fall," added Golden.

            In its new technical assistance role, HHS plans to provide more
    support to states with reports, conferences and other collaborative efforts
    to promote creative strategies and promising welfare-to-work programs.  The
    report is available on the ACF web site:  www.acf.dhhs.gov.

    ###


    Note HHS press releases are available on the World Wide Web at:
    http://www.hhs.gov.



    Michael Kharfen
    HHS Administration for Children & Families
    mkharfen@acf.dhhs.gov
    http://www.acf.dhhs.gov


(202) 401-9215 phone
(202) 205-9688 fax


