RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JUL-1998 17:30:25.00

SUBJECT:   Master Teachers

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is where things stand on the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards.

1. Overall, we are faced with strong opposition from Goodling and the
House Republicans, a profound lack of interest from House Dems, and
reasonably strong bipartisan support for the Board on the Senate side.   In
balance, Goodling probably has the upper hand mainly because he seems to
care about this a whole lot more than any other conferee.

2. Riley is meeting with Kennedy, Dodd and Jeffords this afternoon, and
with Goodling and McKeon tomorrow--to complete his meetings prior to the
HEA conference. We'll see if those meetings produce any new
insights--particularly if we get any indication that there is room for
compromise with Goodling over the National Board--or if there are any
trades over other issues we can pursue.  It's a long shot, because most
signals are that Goodling is as dug in on this as he was last year on the
test.

3. The Board has done a good job in shoring up bipartisan support in the
Senate. However, the Board staff continues to seriously underestimate the
jeopardy it is in.  I have made some headway on this in the past several
days by bypassing the DC lobbyist and going directly to the President, Jim
Kelly. On Saturday I will talk to Jim Hunt and to Bob Welling (VP of
Proctor and Gamble) one of the biggest and most politically active
business supporters of the board.  Pending the outcome of tomorrow
morning's meeting, my message will be that the board's federal support is
in serious jeopardy and that it (1) must work with us and Congressional
supporters on a "Board reform package" to better help its supporters carry
the Boards water in conference and (2) Hunt and Wehling in particular most
strategically mobilize gubernatorial and business supporters to work
selected conferees and leadership on this issue.

4.  I've got a meeting tomorrow morning with WH, OMB, ED, Nat. Board
staff, AFT and NEA, and Kennedy and Dodd's staff.    In addition to
assessing where we stand, the meeting will focus on:
Shaping the responses to the attacks on the board.    I won't go into detail
here, . though these involve 4 key issues:
the salary of the director (240K) and other senior staff
the cost of certifying teachers
racial disparities in participation in board certification
lack of evidence that students of board-certified teachers learn more than
those of noncertified teachers.
The outcome I'm looking for here is a combination of steps the board can
take on its own to address concerns, and legislative language so there is
can be a compromise in conference.    They key question is whether we are


going to have to do this with the board or around it.

Firming up the resolve of the Senate. We worked and watched the Senate
very closely when HEA came up there, in the event that Ashcroft or someone
like that tried to add Goodling's provision.  In the process, we
developed/strengthened support on both sides of the aisle (e.g., Kennedy,
Dodd, Jack Reed among D's, and Jeffords, DeWine, Faircloth among R's) .
I'm trying to figure out how we can use the Rep. Governors who support the
board (Voinavich, Branstad, and Fordice, among others) to strengthen
support in the Senate, including by figuring out a way for Fordice and
Voinavich to get to Lott.

Increasing the level of interest/support of House Dems.  While we will not
convert any of the House Dems into avid supporters of the Board, the
dynamics of the conference will be more favorable if House Dems are more
engaged.  Though they did not speak up yesterday, Kildee and Andrews have
in fact been Board supporters (Andrews spoke up on behalf of the Board
when Goodling introduced his amendment in April).  NEA, AFT and the Nat.
Association of Black School Educators (for Clay) can help on this.


