RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-JUL-1998 17:36:32.00

SUBJECT:   Latest on House tobacco

TO: Ron Klain ( CN=Ron Klain/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

ce: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
House GOP Delays Teen-Smoking Bill

By DAVID ESPO
Associated Press Writer

WASHINGTON (AP) -- House Republicans have sidetracked legislation to
curtail teen smoking at least until September,
according to congressional officials, amid internal debate over whether to
abandon the measure entirely.

As recently as two weeks ago, Speaker Newt Gingrich told reporters an
anti-smoking bill would be passed by the time
lawmakers recess Aug. 5 for a month-long break. Key lawmakers were close
to agreement on proposed legislation.

But officials said that by last week, an increasing number of Republicans
had become persuaded that the issue had effectively
died in the Senate earlier this year, and was rapidly diminishing as an
election-year concern among voters.

At the same time, they said, GOP leaders had so watered down the measure
that Rep. Deborah Pryce, the Ohio Republican
who has been chairing a task force charged with drafting the bill, was
expressing discomfort with the product.

"A growing number of people really want to see what happens"    when they
return home and hear from voters, Ms. Pryce said
Friday.

As for herself, Pryce said, "I'm going to keep pressing the issue when we
return. It might not be on the political radar screen,
but I think teen smoking is a problem and this Congress should take
responsibili ty" for legislation.



Democrats seized on the development as evidence that Republicans are
beholden to the tobacco industry, which has donated
millions to GOP campaigns in recent years. " I think the tobacco companies
have won the day, " said Laura Nichols,
spokeswoman for House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo. "They don't
want to have another round of debate, and
that's reflected in their (Republicans') decision not to introduce a bill
and have a debate before we leave for August."

Gingrich spokeswoman Christina Martin said the GOP leadership will
"revisit the issue when we return"   in September.

The draft GOP House bill would rely largely on expanded government
regulation of tobacco manufacturing and advertising as
well as a public advertising campaign and restrictions on vending machines
to curb teen smoking. It includes no tax increases to
drive up the cost of cigarettes, nor provisions to penalize tobacco
companies that fail to meet smoking reduction targets.

Nor does it include any of the protections from lawsuit liability that the
tobacco companies favor.

Several Republicans, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that among
top GOP leaders, Gingrich was the strongest
advocate of going ahead with the measure, and was under pressure from
others to reverse course.

Earlier this year, Republicans worried that the drive by the White House
and Democrats for legislation aimed at reducing teen
smoking could cause them problems this fall.

But in a pitched battle on the Senate floor, a bill to raise the price of
cigarettes by more than $1 a pack died when critics
complained it was a "tax and spend"   prescription for the problem of
underage smoking.

Since then, numerous public opinion polls have indicated the issue does
not rank high on the list of public concerns in the run-up
to the election.

Rep. John Linde~ of Georgia, chairman of the GOP campaign committee and a
participant in House leadership meetings, said he
has opposed bringing a bill to the floor. "The public generally believes
... that tobacco smoking is voluntary,"  he said.

Other Republicans take a different position.

At one meeting where the issue was discussed, Rep. Jim Greenwood, R-Pa.,
recalled, " I argued that to do nothing is bad
politics, because even though this issue is not Number 1 on everybody's
radar screen, we'd be vulnerable to attack ads that we
are too cozy with tobacco, which is not true."

Further complicating efforts to bring legislation to the floor was a split
within the Republican ranks that makes it difficult to
achieve a majority. Some Republicans favor a tax increase, or penalties
for tobacco companies that fail to meet preset smoking
reduction guidelines. Others, from tobacco states, favor little or no
government intervention. Few, if any Democrats, were


viewed as likely to join in helping to pass a Republican bill following
Gingrich's rejection earlier this year of a proposed
bipartisan measure.

Gingrich himself has not addressed the issue recently in public.

But as long ago as last January, when Clinton called for a bill to curb
teen smoking as part of his State of the Union address, the
speaker said Republicans legislate on the issue.

On the day after the Senate bill died, Gingrich and Ms. Pryce called a
news conference to announce that House Republicans
would soon unveil a slimmed-down tobacco bill. Regarding Democrats who
said in advance that the GOP bill would
accomplish little, Gingrich said bitingly at the time:

"r would hope that they not be drawn into letting children become addicts
because they'd rather have the issue this fall."
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 035 - FOLDER - 007


[08/02/1998 - 08/03/1998]
