RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-AUG-1998 15:13:32.00

SUBJECT:   Bilingual ed briefing for CHC meeting

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is an update on bilingual ed I prepared for Janet's briefing
material. We were discussing this as you came into her office.   I haven't
sent this to her yet. Let me know what you think.

Bilingual Education: The English Fluency Act, introduced by Rep. Riggs, may
 come to the House floor this week.  The bill would eliminate the existing
Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant Education programs and replace
it with a block grant requiring students to be placed in regular
English-language classes after two years, and denying funds to districts
for any children remaining in bilingual classes after three years.  The
bill would also eliminate funding for professional development programs,
and would curtail the enforcement powers of the Education DepartmentO,s
Office of Civil Rights.

Members of the Hispanic Caucus have been concerned that you would couple
opposition to the Riggs bill with a proposal of your own to reform
bilingual education.   They feel strongly that Congress should address the
program during its scheduled reauthorization next year.   Reps. Becerra,
Hinojosa and Martinez were each told last week that the Administration did
not intend to transmit an alternative to the Riggs bill, unless there was
broad sentiment within the Democratic Caucus that one is needed.   At
present, there is no push from the Democratic Caucus for an alternative
bill. We are preparing a SAP that will indicate strong opposition to
Riggs, but will stop short of a veto threat.   We do not believe we should
issue a veto threat without an alternative bill to support.   Further,
since it is extremely unlikely that the Senate will take the bill up this
session even if it passes in the House, as a practical matter a veto
threat is unnecessary.

In your meeting with the Caucus, we recommend that you:
  State your opposition to the Riggs bill, but do not state your intention
to veto it.
 Reiterate that you do not plan to send an alternative bill to Congress
this session.
 Indicate that bilingual education must be strengthened, with better
prepared teachers, and greater accountability for results.  Indicate that
you have asked DPC and the Education Department to consult with the CHC as
we develop our proposal for reauthorization of the Bilingual Education
program and other programs in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA) .


