     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-AUG-1998 15:33:29.00

     SUBJECT:   bilingual revised

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Bilingual Education: The English Fluency Act, introduced by Rep. Riggs, may
      come to the House floor this week.  The bill would eliminate the existing
     Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant Education programs and replace
     it with a block grant requiring students to be placed in regular
     English-language classes after two years, and denying funds to districts
     for any children remaining in bilingual classes after three years.  The
     bill would also eliminate funding for professional development programs,
     and would curtail the enforcement powers of the Education DepartmentD,s
     Office of Civil Rights.

     Members of the Hispanic Caucus have been concerned that you would couple
     opposition to the Riggs bill with a proposal of your own to reform
     bilingual education.   They feel strongly that Congress should address the
     program during its scheduled reauthorization next year.   Reps. Becerra,
     Hinojosa and Martinez were each told last week that the Administration did
     not intend to transmit an alternative to the Riggs bill, unless there was
     broad sentiment within the Democratic Caucus that one is needed.   At
     present, there is no push from the Democratic Caucus for an alternative
     bill. We are preparing a SAP that will indicate strong opposition to
     Riggs, but will stop short of a veto threat. We do not believe we should
     issue a veto threat without an alternative bill to support.   Further,
     since it is extremely unlikely that the Senate will take the bill up this
     session even if it passes in the House, as a practical matter a veto
     threat is unnecessary.

     Talking Points:

       I am opposed to the Riggs bill. It would arbitrarily cut off services to
     students who need them, retreat from our efforts to provide well-prepared
     teachers for bilingual education programs, and curtail efforts to protect
     the civil rights of LEP students.

      I do not plan to transmit an alternative to the Riggs bill during this
     session of Congress. I believe we must strengthen our efforts to help LEP
     students learn English and succeed in academic subjects, and plan on
     sending a proposal to Congress next year, as part of the reauthorization
     of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.

      I have asked the Education Department and my Domestic Policy Council
     staff to consult with the Hispanic Caucus as we develop our proposal for
     reauthorization of the Bilingual Education program and other programs in
     the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). I hope we can work
     together on this.

     If you are asked if you will veto the Riggs bill, we recommend the


following response:

 I do not believe that the Riggs bill will come to my desk, because it is
very unlikely that the Senate will even take it up.  However, I will watch
this bill very closely, and if the situation changes will make my decision
at the appropriate time.


