RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-AUG-1998 19:23:16.00

SUBJECT:   POTUS memo for Native American conference

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christopher C. Jennings    ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft memo for the President on the Native American conference.
Could you please review it so we can get this memo to him by Tuesday?
Jeanne and Chris will are still working on the CHIP announcment. Thanks,
Mary==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D78]MAIL41155191D.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D50D0000010A02010000000205000000BF5E0000000200002CD08373A988FEC651143F
55C77B497C724CD41ADE597F8EE08381FFC74696E450D1A240B792F8D7325C4B32C81291622FDl
9F01D80AADEE24BCF21E1480E9F73530C86113C67E5D9B204C990BAF0642EB6F81A292623D57D3
EF833A2F52B920F1C9AAEB556F6C1C8FC1601801F9512046905BC236545908B7E5759ED02CBFBO
8873899249B78982B769D9791318BFD4A40206D1F655023E4B704C346C45F578AB08939AE2D03C
4B913012D53BCC602939F436D590F27A757F62CA93CC31782E0723D747954B85CB245F2DAF3A3F
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

                                         August 4, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                      MICKEY IBARRA
                      ELENA KAGAN
                      LYNN CUTLER

SUBJECT:               NATIVE AMERICAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE
       On Thursday, April 6, you will attend a conference at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in
Washington, D.C., sponsored by the White House (Domestic Policy Council and Office of
Intergovernmental Affairs) and 15 federal agencies, entitled "Building Economic
Self-Determination in Indian Communities." This memorandum provides some background on
the conference as well as some statistics about American Indians and Alaska Natives. At the
conference, you will make several policy announcements in the areas of education, economic
development, and health care for Native Americans. This event is the first time you have
spoken in front of Native Americans since your meeting with tribal leaders in 1994. During this
conference, you will reaffirm your commitment to protecting tribal sovereignty and reaffirm the
government-to-government relationship between the United States and tribes. Finally, you will
promote and encourage economic self-determination in Indian country.

Purpose and Structure of the Conference

        This conference grew out of your meeting with tribal leaders on April 29, 1994, and the
establishment of the Domestic Policy Council's (DPC) Working Group on American Indians and
Alaska Natives. In addition, as a result of the government-wide survey of activities in relation to
Indian country and your suggestion that initiatives be developed around economic development,
the DPC's subgroup on economic development started planning this conference several months
ago.

       This conference will take place on August 5-6 at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in
Washington, D.C. The event is sponsored by the White House (Office of
Intergovernmental Affairs and the Domestic Policy Council), the Departments of
Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Housing
and Urban Development, Interior, Justice, Labor, State, Transportation, the Treasury, and
the Comptroller of the Currency and the Small Business Administration. Secretary
Babbitt, Secretary Daley, Secretary Glickman, Secretary Herman, Attorney General Reno,
and Administrator Alvarez will speak at the conference.

       The conference will have approximately 800 participants including tribal leaders

                                                1
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

and members, businesses, and federal agency personnel. This conference will cover topics
such as commerce in Indian country; building infrastructure and positive climate for
business; tribal self-government and economic self-determination; agriculture and
economic development; rural business; community development in Indian country;
electronic commerce; welfare to work initiatives; and tourism_

Background on American Indians and Alaska Natives

       Indian America is made up of more than 550 tribes, with a total population of
approximately 2.4 million_ Approximately forty percent of all American Indians and
Alaska Natives are under the age of twenty_ About twenty percent of the total American
Indian and Alaska Native population resides on 314 reservations, Indian lands, and in
Alaska Villages that make up Indian country. American Indians and Alaska Natives have
a land base of approximately 3,615,210 square miles. It is made up of American Indian
and Alaska Native trust lands totaling approximately 56,000,000 acres and Alaska Native
lands totaling approximately 44,000,000 acres.

        While economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent years,
American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of the
United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels. Income
levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below those of all other
Americans, and about 34 percent continue to live below the poverty level. In comparison,
the national poverty level is about 14 percent. Complicating factors such as geographical
isolation, under developed infrastructures, and demographics, add to the challenges
confronting tribes as they work toward a better standard of living and quality of life for
tribal peoples.

      Statistics Relating to American Indians and Alaska Natives

     There are 2.4 million American Indians and Alaska Natives in the United States
      according to the March 1997 Current Population Survey. Almost nine hundred thousand
      (899,783) American Indians and Alaska Natives live in rural America.

     Thirty-four percent of rural American Indians and Alaska Natives live in poverty
      compared with 14 percent of other Americans.

     American Indians and Alaska Natives make up a majority of the population in 22
      counties. In these counties, over half of the American Indians and Alaska Natives (51
      percent) lived in poverty at the time of the last census. Income growth in these majority
      American Indian and Alaska Native counties has been below the national average (6.4
      percent from 1989-1996 compared with the national average of7.7 percent).

     In 1996, per-capita income in the American Indian and Alaska Native majority counties
      stood at $12,493, barely half the national average of $24,436. The unemployment rate
      last year in these counties was 12.5 percent compared with the national unemployment

                                              2
       rate of 4.9 percent.                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

Note: County-based per-capita income statistics are based on the Bureau of Economic Analysis
Regional Economic Information System 1996 Income file. Income change from 1989 to 1996
was adjusted for inflation using the Personal Consumption Expenditure implicit deflator.
(Economic Research Service, July 1998).


Government-to-Government Relationship and Tribal Sovereign tv

       The relationship between the tribes and the United States is one of a government to
a government. This principle has shaped the entire history of dealings between the federal
government and the tribes, and is lodged in the Constitution of the United States. Most
recently, you reaffirmed this government-to-government relationship in your May 14, 1998
Executive Order, "Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments."
This executive order requires each agency to consult with representatives of tribal
governments on matters that significantly or uniquely affect Native American communities.


Executive Actions Relating to Native Americans

      Below are the major executive actions you have undertaken with respect to Native
Americans:

      Government-to-Government Relations with Native American Tribal Governments,
       Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies (April 29, 1994).
       This memorandum directs agencies to consult, to the greatest extent practicable and to the
       extent permitted by law, with tribal governments prior to taking actions that affect
       federally recognized tribal governments. In addition, this memorandum requires
       agencies to assess the impact of federal government plans and activities on tribal trust
       resources and assure that tribal government rights and concerns are considered.

      Indian Sacred Sites, Executive Order No. 13007 (May 24, 1996). This executive order
       requires federal agencies to accommodate access to and ceremonial use of Indian sacred
       sites by Indian religious practitioners and to avoid adversely affecting the physical
       integrity of such sacred sites.

      Tribal Colleges and Universities, Executive Order No. 3021 (October 19, 1996). This
       executive order aims to ensure that tribal colleges and universities are more fully
       recognized as accredited institutions, have access to the opportunities afforded other
       institutions, and have Federal resources committed to them on a continuing basis.

      Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, Executive Order
       No. 13084 (May 14, 1998). This executive order strengthens and makes effective across
       Administrations the 1994 Government-to-Govemment memorandum. This executive

                                               3
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

       order serves to establish regular and meaningful consultation and collaboration
       with Indian tribal governments in the development of regulatory practices on
       Federal matters that significantly or uniquely affect their communities, to reduce
       the imposition of unfunded mandates upon Indian tribal governments; and to
       streamline the application process for and increase the availability of waivers to
       Indian tribal governments.

Your Participation at the Conference

        You will make remarks in the afternoon of August 6, which is the second day of the
conference. You will speak to approximately 800 tribal leaders and representatives, business
leaders, and federal agency personnel. The following person will introduce you:

      Dominic Ortiz, student, 21 years old, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. As a
       member of the Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation, Mr. Ortiz attended Haskell Indian
       Nations University, one of the tribal colleges. Currently, he attends the University of
       Kansas. While at Haskell, Mr. Ortiz founded and served as president of the Haskell
       chapter of the American Indian Business Leaders (AmL). Through the guidance and
       mentoring he received from AlBL, Mr. Ortiz started his own business, Potawatomi
       Traders, which sells Native American jewelry at the wholesale level. Potawatomi
       Traders helps to sustain 200 Native American artists whose jewelry is sold at 15 retail
       sites in 4 states. Mr. Ortiz uses profits from his business to fund his education.

       Following your remarks, you will sign at the conference a Native American education
executive order, which is described below.

Policy Announcement to be Made at the Conference

       We recommend that you make the following policy announcements at the conference,
which focus on economic development, education, and health care. As obtaining an education
and receiving quality health care are building blocks of economic self-determination,
announcements in these areas will complement your economic development announcements.

Education

      Native American Education Executive Order. This executive order is designed to
       improve the academic performance of American Indian and Alaska Native students
       in grades K-12. The order focuses special attention on the following five goals: (1)
       improving student achievement in reading and mathematics; (2) increasing high
       school completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3) reducing the influence
       of long-standing factors that impede educational performance, such as poverty and
       substance abuse; (4) creating strong, safe, and drug-free school environments
       conducive to learning; and (5) expanding the use of science and educational
       technology. This order is structured to address Indian educational needs through


                                               4
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

      participation at the federal, state, and local levels. At the federal level, the order
      establishes an Interagency Task Force which will plan budget initiatives, develop an
      education resource guide, and assist in implementing a comprehensive research
      agenda on Indian education. At the regional level, the order mandates a series of
      regional forums to be convened to identify promising practices. Finally, at the local
      level, this executive order sets up pilot sites which will receive comprehensive
      technical assistance in support of the goals of the order.

Economic Development

     Executive Directive to Study Technology Infrastructure Needs in Indian Country and to
      Prepare a Strategic Plan to Coordinate Native American Economic Development. This
      memorandum will direct the Departments of Commerce and Interior, in cooperation with
      other agencies, to issue a report within 180 days on the technology infrastructure needs
      within Indian country, including distance learning facilities, telecommunications, and
      manufacturing facilities. In addition, this memorandum will direct the Department of
      Commerce, Department of Interior, and the Small Business Administration to develop,
      within 90 days, a strategic plan that will coordinate efficiently economic development
      programs across agencies for Native American and Alaska Native communities. The
      plan will build upon current efforts as well as look toward future efforts in collaborating
      on such matters as establishing programs, enhancing infrastructure, and developing
      software.

     One-Stop Mortgage Shopping Centers in Indian Country. The Department of the
      Treasury, along with HUD and Interior, will develop a pilot one-stop mortgage shopping
      center on the Navajo Nation. This one-stop center is needed because residents of Indian
      reservations encounter several unique issues when seeking to obtain a mortgage. Trust
      land status, tribal sovereignty, and requirements to gain clear title from the Bureau of
      Indian Affairs are examples of issues that lenders and borrowers must grapple with during
      the mortgage lending process. In addition, individuals seeking to acquire a homesite
      lease and a residential mortgage are required to obtain approval from several federal,
      tribal, state, and local agencies as well as private providers. This one-stop mortgage
      center would permit individuals seeking to acquire a homesite lease and residential
      mortgage to visit only one location that would coordinate with the required agencies and
      private providers. The basis for creating such an entity on the Navajo reservation already
      exists through an organization called the Navajo Partnership for Housing, which was
      created by the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation.

     Providing $70 Million to Create Technology-Based Jobs in Indian Country. The U.S.
      Department of Agriculture (USDA), through its Bringing Rural America Venture
      Opportunities (BRAVO) initiative, will direct $70 million of its contracting dollars
      through Fiscal Year 2000 to assist seven American Indian and Alaska Native tribes in
      establishing small start-up technology companies that will provide software development,
      maintenance, and technical support services. Through the 8(a) program, USDA, large


                                               5
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

      technology companies doing business with USDA, and the Tribal Colleges and other
      land-grant educational institutions will work with American Indian and Alaska Native
      tribes to mentor and assist them in setting up these businesses to bid on government
      contracts.


Health Care

     Support Elevating the Director of the Indian Health Service to an Assistant Secretary.
      You should call on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian
      Health Service to an Assistant Secretary. This has been vetted through the Presidential
      Personnel Office and is supported by Secretary Shalala. The Administration will
      continue to work with Senator McCain and other members of the Congress to get this
      vital legislation passed. On matters of health care, the head of the Indian Health Service
      acts principally as the administrator of the vast Indian Health Service system, as well as
      an advocate on behalf of the needs of the Nation's more than 550 federally-recognized
      Indian tribes. Elevating the IHS Director to the position of Assistant Secretary will
      strengthen the government-to-government relationship; facilitate communication and
      consultation with the Tribes on matters of Indian health; and raise awareness of Indian
      health concerns throughout HHS and the entire federal government.. The current director,
      Dr. Michael Trujillo, would become only the second full-blooded Native American to be
      an Assistant Secretary.

     Not completed yet Enroll Native American Children in the CHIP program. Jeanne
      Lambrew and Chris Jennings suggested that we might be able to make an announcement
      that Indian children who receive health benefits from the Indian Health Service are not
      insured for purposes of the CHIP program, making them eligible for CHIP benefits.
      However, we would need to work out the funding -- money would be taken away from
      the states.

Attachments

     Conference Agenda
     The American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut Population (U.S. Census Bureau)
     Key Facts About American Indian and Alaska Native Children and Youth (prepared by
      IHS)
     Testimony on Native American Economic Development Before the U.S. Senate
      Committee on Indian Affairs




                                              6


