RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN;Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-AUG-1998 09:28:10.00

SUBJECT:   Brady revised final -- Rahm's edits in bold

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN;Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Revised Final 08/06/98 9:00am
Jeff She sol

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS ON THE BRADY LAW
THE ROSE GARDEN
August 6, 1998

        Acknowledgments: VP; Sec. Rubin; AG Reno; Sarah and Jim Brady; Officer
Gerald Flynn, InternatO,1 Brotherhood of Police Officers; Police Chief
Bobby Moody, Pres. of InternatO,1 Assoc. of Chiefs of Police; Sheriff Pat
Sullivan, NatO,1 SheriffO,s Assoc.; and all the law enforcement officials
here today.

        I want to thank Sarah and Jim Brady for all their hard work.  For
years, police, families, and the victims of violence waged the fight on
their own for safe streets, safe homes, and safe schools. Washington sat
on the sidelines.  In 1993, we moved to the frontlines -- joining people
like Sarah and Jim and the law enforcement officials we have here today.

        Today I want to talk about the progress weO,ve made in our
countryO,s fight against crime and the steps we must take to build on that
progress. More than five years ago, we made a commitment as an
administration to recover our nationO,s streets from crime and violence,
to provide security for AmericaO,s families.  It required a new,
comprehensive strategy of law enforcement, based simply on what works: on
community policing, strong anti-gang efforts, and targeted deterrence; on
tougher penalties and smarter prevention.

        Our strategy -- from the Brady Bill to the Crime Bill, from the
assault weapons ban to the Violence Against Women Act -- is showing
remarkable results.  We are well on our way to putting 100,000 new police
officers on the streets, ahead of schedule. All across America, violent
crime is down, property crime is down, murder is down dramatically.  Crime
rates overall have dropped to a 25-year low. Americans should take pride
and comfort in our steady progress.



        The Brady Law, in particular, shows the progress America can make
when we take responsibility for the safety of our families and our
communities.   Since the Brady Law took effect, gun trafficking and
gun-related crime are on the wane.   It is no wonder:  according to a
recent report by the Justice Department, background checks have put a stop
to nearly a quarter of a million handgun purchases since the law took
effect. Last year, 62 percent of those rejections were based on felony
convictions or indictments. ThatO,s 118 felons a day turned away, thanks
to the Brady Law. ThatO,s 118 felons a day going home empty-handed instead
of well armed.

         As we near the fifth anniversary of the Brady Law and celebrate
its progress, we must continue to press ahead in the fight against crime
and violence. WeO,ve begun to win the battle; what we must not do is
retreat.   Yet that is what the gun lobby and its allies on Capitol Hill
would have us do -- retreat from a law that is keeping guns out of the
hands of criminals, retreat from the national interest and surrender our
safety to the special interests.

        Now, before the Brady Law even goes fully into effect, the gun
lobby and its friends in Congress are trying to undermine it. They claim
to support the National Insta-Check System -- but would deny the FBI the
funds it needs to make the system work. They claim to support background
checks -- but would have the FBI immediately destroy records that are
vital to the process.  In their official literature, the gun lobby is
proudly calling this measure what it is -- and I quote -- an
O&anti-Brady08 amendment.   From its anti-Brady efforts to its attempts to
undermine the assault weapons ban, this Congress is trying to turn back
the clock on common sense crime control. But let me be clear:     I will
oppose any legislation that would gut the Brady Law and put guns back into
the hands of felons and fugitives.   When we passed the Brady Law, we did
so with bipartisan support.   Now, Congress should again put progress above
partisanship, step up to its responsibility, and stop playing politics
with public safety.

        Years of experience show that the Brady Law works, and now we must
do everything in our power to make it even more effective.  I have urged
Congress to extend Brady background checks to violent juveniles who should
not be able to buy a gun on their 21st birthday.  Congress should also
extend -- permanently -- the S-day waiting period before it expires in
November. Too many crimes are committed within hours of a handgun
purchase. The waiting period gives tempers time to cool.   It gives
potential criminals time to consider the consequences, and gives local law
enforcement officials time to check all relevant records, even those that
are not computerized, and stop every last prohibited person from walking
home with a gun in hand and violence in mind.

        The S-day waiting period is good law enforcement, itO,s smart, and
it works.  That's why Officer Flynn and others like him support a
permanent extension.  They know from experience that a waiting period is
our last, best line of defense to keep guns out of criminalsO, hands.

        The real measure of our progress, of course, is more than the
decline in crime.  It is whether families feel secure in their homes and
their neighborhoods; whether a child feels safe in the classroom and the
schoolyard; whether the American people, in big cities or small towns,
feel the full measure of their freedom. That, at heart, is what the Brady
Law has helped accomplish; and that is the vision to which we must all
remain true if we are to build a safer, stronger America for the 21st


century.


