RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-AUG-1998 15:30:25.00

SUBJECT:   The piece I mentioned

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BILL'S MEA CULPA: THE MORRIS
                                       DRAFT

                      By DICK MORRIS


                      DEAR Mr. President:

                      On Aug. 17 you must face the music and
                      answer Kenneth Starr's questions before the
                      grand jury. Before you do, you must face the
                      country and explain what happened between
                      you and Monica Lewinsky.

                      If your comments so far have been truthful, stick
                      with them. But if not, come clean.

                      The national polls show that voters are eager to
                      forgive, forget and move on. They believe that
                      you had sex with Monica Lewinsky, believe that
                      you lied about it, and don't much care. If they
                      are right, just say so - and get it over with.

                      When you called me on the morning of Jan. 21
                      as the Monica story was breaking, I told you that
                      there is a vast capacity for forgiveness in this
                      land. It's still there. Trust it. Go with it. The last
                      seven months have removed some of the shock
                      and prepared people for what they suspect is
                      the truth. What you might not have been able to
                      say in January, you can say in August. But after
                      the grand jury appearance, you will be out of
                      options and can no longer correct what you
                      have said.

                     If you let Aug. 17 pass without correcting any
                     misstatements you might have made, you will
                     be stuck as surely as Carter in the hostage
                     crisis, Johnson in Vietnam, Reagan in
                     Iran-Contra and Nixon in Watergate. As we've
                     discussed many times before, only when
                     presidents hunker down and get stuck can they
                     be hunted, tracked down and destroyed. I do
                     not believe you have any choice but to speak
                     out if the facts are different from those you have


                    outlined. You are out of options.

                    David Kendall may advise against speaking
                    out. But he's only a lawyer and you are much
                    more than a client.

                    Hillary may worry that her public acceptance
                    and amplification of your denials have left her
                    irretrievably committed and that a change in
                    your position would also leave her exposed to
                    ridicule for blaming this all on a "vast right-wing
                    conspiracy." But she understands forgiveness
                    better than you or I ever will. You must do what
                    you must do.

                    So here's my draft of what I think you should say
                    to the country, if the facts warrant it.

                    *
                    *

                    *
                    My fellow Americans -

                    Tomorrow I will face a grand jury and give a full
                    and complete account of my relationship with
                    Monica Lewinsky. But tonight I want to tell you
                    about it first.

                    Before I was elected, I told you that I had
                    sometimes been the cause of pain in my
                    marriage and that I regretted my mistakes.
                    Since my election, I have tried hard not to err,
                    but sometimes I have fallen short. Sometimes I
                    have sinned. Specifically, I have had a
                    relationship with Monica Lewinsky that was, on
                    occasion, sexual.

                    When I was asked about it in the deposition in
                    the Paula Jones lawsuit - a suit which the court
                    has thrown out as without merit - I felt remorse
                    and shame and misrepresented the nature of
                    my relationship to spare my wife and family
                    more pain. As you know, I cannot run for
                    president again. So, political considerations
                    were not foremost in my mind. My main concern
                    was not to let my failing inflict any more anguish
                    on those I love.

                    In my subsequent comments to you, I was less
                    than candid and I deeply regret it. All I can say
                    is that I sinner. I erred. I was flawed and I ask for
                    your understanding and forgiveness. I should
                    not have had a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky -
                    the fault is mine, not hers - and I should have
                    been more honest with you in admitting it.

                    I have always tried to level with you as we have


                    faced the crises and difficulties of the past six
                    years. When we needed to pull together after
                    Oklahoma City, when we had to control
                    hand-guns to reduce crime, when we needed to
                    cut spending and balance the budget, when we
                    had to send peacekeeping troops abroad - I
                    have always tried to explain honestly and
                    forthrightly what the situation was that we faced.
                    I am sorry that I did not bring the same integrity
                    to my exposition of my private life.

                    When I ran for president, I promised to do a
                    good job. Your affirmation in re-electing me
                    indicates that you feel I have done my best. But I
                    never hold myself up as more or less than a
                    human being in my personal life who
                    sometimes makes mistakes. I need God's love
                    and grace about as much as the next man.

                    I hope you forgive me. I hope you recognize in
                    me a man trying to change his ways. If you
                    extend to me your trust, I will not abuse it again.
                    But it is mainly the forgiveness of my family that
                    I want. What I did was private and not political.
                    My failings were personal and human. It is from
                    those that I love the most that I need the most
                    understanding and compassion so I can get on
                    with my life with my family.

                    If you want me to serve out my term as
                    president, I will. If you find the forgiveness that I
                    know is in your hearts, then together we can
                    finish the task of building a bridge to the next
                    millennium. The decision, my fellow Americans,
                    is yours.

                    Good night and God bless America.

                    *
                    *
                    *
                    Once before in our relationship, after your
                    defeat as Governor of Arkansas, I advised you
                    that contrition and apology were the only
                    possible courses to follow. The voters of
                    America will extend to you their compassion
                    and grace. Americans are a people steeped in
                    the Judea-Christian recognition that we are all
                    flawed, that only he who is without sin is entitled
                    to cast a stone. Trust them. And may the force
                    be with you.



                                MORE COMMENTARY


