RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-AUG-1998 10:10:24.00

SUBJECT:   Food Safety

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Attached is the draft EO for a food safety council. We've received
comment from OMB, USDA, OSTP. The major issues are: including the vision
statement, sunsetting the council, and the scope of the budget that gets
submitted by the council.  Changes from the original draft are in bold,
and I've briefly summarized the changes below. O'hara at HHS called Monday
after returning from vacation and said he would like to submit as well.

We've discussed trying to have this ready for the 8- 19/20 when NAS comes
out. The other big issue we need to resolve is whether the VP wants to be
the third co-chair.    (I think he preserves his ability to intervene
selectively by not being on the council.)


1.  Introduction: We added the "vision statement" as preamble. USDA, NPR
(Jean), and EPA all mentioned that they would like to do this
independantly as a FR notice with hearings on the vision statement topic.
I think we should either combine it into the EO or wait and do this at
some other later time.

Also, OSTP suggested this science-based language in the introduction.

2. Sections I(a) (b): we added a third joint chair (TBD) , and put EPA and
OMB on the council. Also a provision suggested by OSTP to provide staff
as necessary.

3. Section 2, Purpose: OSTP suggested making it less a review of NAS and
more towards developing a long-range plan taking into consideration the
NAS report. We added preparing an annual budget as one of the purposes.

4. section 3: OSTP suggested a deadline for developing the food safety
plan. I've added space for a due date.

 section (c):  OSTP wanted the council to "establish" the research
institute, we changed it back to "oversee" as it already is supposed to
being established under previous presidential action. we did add their
lanaguage about working with NSTC

5.   section 4: USDA wanted the section to include states.


6.   Section 5: There was a general request for a sunset in this
section.  I didn't add it because i felt that the council should go out of
business when it recommended a better coordinating mechanism -- but that
in the absence of a better way, we shouldn't mandate its demise.   =================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D49]MAIL43967552C.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750432C050000010A0201000000020500000051210000000200002DB7C418CD1B5D3924453A
31A1C53CB7F91493C42AFD68AAA3F7CAD5ADOD4F61E27A631F2C98EC41EDAD1FDC90D97603B9AE
A67F936F5367C5623391529EFDEA909E31775F4BC5A0075BEBC1F989AE9115865ABBCBA2764651
13489973C1A95635D9E6E015F68A393C494A6E91AC1ACCFFB025284E86B9C138COB93BCB67307A

                       PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


                                     Draft 8/10/98, 5 pm

Introduction

        Recently, representatives of the several federal agencies who work on food safety
issues met and drafted a statement expressing a vision of what our nation's food safety
system should accomplish. While we have already made great progress towards making
our nation's food safer, this positive statement sets out goals to improve our food and our
regulatory system still more. Specifically, it sets out the following vision of what the future
should hold: "Consumers can be confident that food is safe, healthy, and affordable. We
work within a seamless food safety system that uses farm to table preventive strategies and
integrated research, surveillance, inspection, and enforcement. We are vigilant to new and
emergent threats and consider the needs of vulnerable populations. We use science and
risk-based approaches along with public-partnerships. Food is safe because everyone
understands and accepts their responsibilities." In order to help translate this vision into
reality, I hereby issue the following Executive Order.

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United
States of America, and in order to improve the safety of the food supply through
science-based regulation and well coordinated inspection, enforcement, research and
education programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

(a)     There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council
shall comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Senior Policy Advisor for the Vice President,
the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget. The Council shall consult with other Federal agencies, State and local
government agencies as well as with consumer and producer groups, as appropriate.

(b)     The Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the XXX shall serve as
Joint Chairs of the Council. In consultation with other Council members, the Joint Chairs .
shall designate a council coordinator and provide staff with assistance from other members
of the Council and as authorized by law provide necessary additional staff and
administrative support. Council members may designate senior executive branch officials as
their representatives.

Section 2. Purpose.
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
activities taking into consideration the findings and recommendations of the NAS report
"Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption" and other input from the public
on how to improve the effectiveness of the current food safety system. The Council shall
make recommendations to the President on how to advance Federal efforts to implement a
science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply and to enhance
coordination among Federal agencies, State and local governments, and the private sector. The
Council shall oversee the presentation of an annual unified food safety budget proposal
that will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget

Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

(a)    The Council shall in X months develop a comprehensive Federal food safety plan
that contains specific recommendations on needed changes. Specifically, the plan should
identify changes in existing programs, administrative policies, and laws that must be
enacted to achieve a seamless and science-based food safety system from farm to table.
The planning process should consider both short and long-term issues including new and
emerging threats and the special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the
elderly.

(b)      The Council shall annually develop a food safety budget that sustains and strengthens
existing capacities, eliminates duplication, and ensures the most effective use of resources for
improving food safety, including developing a unified budget for the President's Food Safety
Initiative and such other food safety issues as the Council determines appropriate.

©      The Council shall oversee the Joint Institute of Food Safety Research (JIFSR) and
in consultation with the National Science and Technology Council and through JIFSR shall
establish mechanisms to direct Federal research efforts toward the highest priority food
safety needs in regulation and food production, processing, and distribution.

Section 4. Cooperation.

       All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, further partnerships and
cooperation with states and other public and private sector efforts wherever such partnerships
and cooperation are possible and wold further improve the safety of the food supply.

Section 5. General Provisions.

       This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at
law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers or any person.




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


