RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-AUG-1998 10:58:42.00

SUBJECT:     blablabla

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
"Say goodbye to tobaccoD(. ItO,s gone." Rep. John Linder, National
Republican Congressional
Committee Chairman, before House adjourned Friday

HIGHLIGHTS

   1.We believe the current tobacco environment is similar to 1986-87,
when sentiment turned
     dramatically as the 2nd tobacco litigation wave collapsed. From 12/85
to 9/87, Philip MorrisD,
     relative multiple soared from 55% to 90%, as a wave of favorable
appellate rulings convinced
     investors that bankruptcy risks were way overdiscounted, and Philip
MorrisD, stock price
     tripled (S&P +70%) .

   2.0ur discussion with senior executives suggests that the subpar
investment performance of the
     group over the past 18 months is likely to compel all company boards
to take more aggressive
     stances in accelerating earnings growth and unlocking values through
buybacks, dividend
     hikes, and asset distributions. This is what happened between
1985-1990 (MO tripled
     earnings and dividends). After an 18-month absence, Loews (LTR) has
now resumed its
     buyback program, despite the TischsD, bearishness on the market.
   3.0n Friday, the House joined the Senate in recess until Labor Day, and
Republican leaders
     conceded officially there would be no tobacco legislation passed this
year. with a $.10/pack
     excise tax increase passed last September now scheduled to go into
effect in 2000, and
     another $.05/pack hike due to begin 2002, we believe it will be at
least a few years before
     Congress attempts to tackle tobacco again, given the tortured and
exhaustive process the
     McCain bill was put through before it was finally killed this summer.
   4.We expect a new settlement between the industry and the 46 attorneys
general who have not
     settled by Labor Day. We expect the industry, having taken off a week
to assess the renegade
     provisions (what to do about manufacturers who donD,t join the deal)
will have concluded that
     the renegade provisions on the table -- states vow to bring claims


· " against manufacturers and
         retailers who donD,t comply; statesD, payments, already volume
    adjusted, fall further if renegade
          share increases -- are sufficient. We perceive that Philip Morris and
    most large wholesalers
         believe the renegade problem is better dealt with by beefing up trade
    programs.
       5.Expected decertifications of state class actions by the highest
    courts in Maryland (any day)
         and Louisiana (this Fall) are the likely catalysts that will convince
    investors that the Engle class
         action, which begins after Labor Day in West Palm Beach, FL and will
    last three months, will
         also be decertified by the Florida Supreme Court, in early-1999. In
    the history of mass tort
         personal injury actions, we find no record of any multi-phase trial
    ever reaching the individual
         stage (defendants settled or class was decertified) .
       6.We expect the Florida trial court that heard Widdick, or the same 1st
    Circuit appellate court
         that overturned Carter, to throw out the widdick (aka Maddox) verdict
    under the same
         reasoning (preemption, 1963 B&W evidence not appropriate, documents
    should have been
         protected under attorney-client privilege). This would erase the one
    remaining loss on the
         industryD,s unblemished record at trial, and further dissuade
    potential plaintiff attorneys from
         pursuing individual claims.
       7.Risk #1: If there is no state-only settlement, we see 5% downside.
    The Washington Medicaid
         trial begins October 14. The judge has dismissed all but three claims
    -- conspiracy, anti-trust,
         and violation of WashingtonD,s Consumer Protection Act (CPA). While
    the latter permits only
         injunctive relief, anti-trust violations and conspiracy combined with
    CPA would permit money
         damages. The judge has ruled that the industry can introduce evidence
    that the state collected
         more in excise taxes than it claims in damages.
       8.Risk #2: If the Administration files its own Medicare/Medicaid
    recovery action to get the
         industry to cough up money for the federal government and accept FDA
    jurisdiction, we could
         see 5% downside as investors worry that this new action might trigger
    fraudulent conveyance
         claims. Any federal claim, however, would have to be filed in federal
    court (have dismissed 5
         of 5 labor union / health care claims). The federal government,
    unlike the states, shows a clear
         paper trail of knowledge of tobaccoD,s risks.
       9.We reiterate our outperform ratings on Philip Morris (price target
    $60), RJR Nabisco ($40),
         and UST ($40).


