RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd A. Summers ( CN;Todd A. Summers/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-AUG-199B 10:29:14.00

SUBJECT:     Correction Officer Health and Safety Act

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena -

This is the memo we discussed this morning.

Todd

---------------------- Forwarded by Todd A. Summers/OPD/EOP on OB/11/9B
10:27 AM ---------------------------




           Todd A. Summers
           08/07/98 12:02:04 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP, Ronald E. Jones/OMB/EOP
cc: Sandra Thurman/OPD/EOP, Richard J. Turman/OMB/EOP
Subject: Correction Officer Health and Safety Act

I just spoke with DoJ's leg person handling this bill, and told her that
we were leaning to recommending that the Administration's position move
from "strongly oppose" to silent.   Here is why we support that position:

The Policy

Requiring Testing
We do not want to support mandatory testing.  We have always maintained
that voluntary counseling and testing is adequate.  That remains our
position on a number of bills, including Rep. Coburn's.  If we were to
adopt a different stance for prisoners, it opens us up to charges of
hypocrisy and deflates our argument on non-prisoners. Moreover, it could
potentially be infused with racial connotations since prisoners are
predominantly black men. Given the heat that the CDC, NAACP and others
are putting on us for the racial disparities in the epidemic, it might be
prudent to avoid a conflict here.

I understand that Rep. Waters has participated in amending this bill, so
it is clearly on her radar screen. Her staff says that she's in a
position of not actively opposing the bill.  Rep. Pelosi's staff says the
same.

That being said, we now test everyone on the way out of jail so the bill
just moves up the inevitable.  From a scientific perspective, that is


better for prisoners since early detection and treatment of HIV is
recommended.  From a BoP policy perspective, the testing done on the way
out is "voluntary" except that it's required as part of the package of
things that must be done to be released.  So BoP argues that they don't do
mandatory or "forced" testing, but that's semantics.

The bill requires counseling, support, and care for all those who test
HIV-positive. We think that's a good mandate, even if it may be redundant
(BoP's principal objection to the bill, as I understand it).   I think this
works more to the advantage of correction officers, staff, and visitors
than prisoners because the policy now is that prisoners get care if
they're HIV-positive.   (The President's Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS has
been adamant that they believe that there is a difference between policy
and practice at some Federal institutions, but we cannot confirm that and
BoP says it's not true.)

The bill also provides that the Attorney General develop standards of care
and prevention for States, which we think is good. State, county and
local jails ought to be the object of far greater attention since the
prevalence of HIV there is so much higher than Federal institutions.  I
think BoP and DoJ like this part of the bill.

Testing After Potential Exposure
HR2070 also requires testing, or re-testing, after an exposure by a
prisoner to an officer, staff person, or visitor. This is hard to argue,
particularly because there are now protocols for post-exposure prophylaxis
that may be efficacious (not a lot of data yet).  We like that the
determination of whether the exposure risk was significant lies with
DoJ/BoP and should therefore be based on scientific standards and not
subjective fears ("he spit on me, I want him tested"). Universal
precautions should minimize instances of exposure, and BoP encourages
their implementation, but exposures are certainly possible.

The Unions
I've spoken with the leg. director for AFSCME, which represents some
(100,000) of the correctional officers and have a call into SEIU, which
represents others. AFSCME says this is a very big deal for the
correctional officers, and they feel that the bill that passed is a
significant improvement over the original draft that we strongly opposed.
They are less concerned about our active support than they are about our
active opposition--they'd be content if we moved from "strongly oppose" to
silent.

This also makes BoP's objection that officer's are going to be put at risk
during mandatory testing because they might have to hold prisoners down to
take their blood. First of all, I am not convinced this is a significant
issue for Federal prisoners. Second, if the officers' unions are
supporting the bill, why are we objecting on their behalf?

Recommendation
We recommend that the Administration:
remove it's strong opposition to the bill
not actively oppose or support the bill
indicate to Senator Hatch and others that we'll acquiesce to a Senate
version that parallels that which passed the House, and that the
Administration would strongly oppose a version that reverts to the
original version of HR2070.

Please let me know if you have any questions.
.,.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 036 - FOLDER -003


[08/12/1998 - 08/13/1998]
