RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD!O=EOP [ OPD I    )

CREATION DATE!TIME:12-AUG-1998 14:38:23.00

SUBJECT:   Education Working Group for race book


TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I gather from Maria's memo on this topic earlier today that there have
been a series of discussions on how this process will unfold.  I've called
an education working group meeting for 10:30 tomorrow morning--and I've
just been asked to join a meeting at 5:30 this afternoon with NEC staff
and Chris Edley to discuss process issues.  It would be helpful before
these meeting occur to get your sense of these discussions, and how you
would like me to proceed.  In particular:

1. What is the product I'm working towards? If I follow Maria correctly,
it appears to be a memo to POTUS (by late September) that would identify a
number of possible "bold ideas" each of which could be further developed,
depending upon his level of interest.  Is that your understanding as well?


2. Whose bold ideas will be included? Are we working toward consensus or
toward options? Is this a DPC process, a DPC/Edley process, or something
else? Chris' bold ideas (e.g., opportunity-to-Iearn standards) are not
likely to be ours.  For example, I'd prefer to look at ways to seriously ex
pand public school choice for kidS in urban areas (e.g., why not encourage
community colleges to offer rigorous high school courses for kids who's
high school math teachers were English majors?) and in failing schools in
particular.

3. How will this fit into the budget process? As best as I can tell, the
FY 2000 budget will be an ideal time to propose bold new ideas--perhaps
the last real chance in this term. Yet the caps for 2000 are more severe
that for FY99, and we will have a few good ideas, such as class size and
education opportunity zones, still on the table. Do you want to think of
new budget initiatives that could compete with last year's unfinished
business, or are we constrained to think only in terms of small new
initiatives and bold ideas for the bully pulpit? Or do we just come up
with the best ideas we can now, and worry about how to pay for them later?

4. Are there particular ideas you want to make sure get included in this,
and particular ways you want to stay involved? How do you want me to
relate to Maria and Chris throughout the process?
-. .
       .0




