          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

          CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-AUG-1998 14:31:00.00

          SUBJECT:   Food Safety Council executive order

          TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          Here is the latest draft of the executive order.  The biggest change is
          that the review of the NAS study is in a separate directive rather than in
          the order itself.  I think that USDA, OMB, NPR, and EPA really don't have
          any major issues left.

          However, I think that you are going to have to talk to HHS about the
          membership of the Council. They don't want DPC. NPR, and OSTP as members
          of the Council because of the evil President theory.  I have tried to work
          out all the other issues.

          Assuming the HHS issues get worked out, I think we are getting pretty
          close to being able to send this through the OMB formal clearance
          process.

          Also -- the NAS briefing is now on Wednesday.  I will send around an
          e-mail when I get the details from Eric Olsen.  Thanks, Mary
          ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

          TEXT:
          Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D79]MAIL44847492A.226 to ASCII,
           The following is a HEX DUMP:

          FF5750432C050000010A020100000002050000009520000000020000AF5C29147FA6AF2143520C
          B9F796435E116AA836EDB2EA25CEBE87C7BD243D303B42D230A0058D4C6DBE5B8C7A715297051F
          OCE7D1C55C46EIB805ECB95B196854FD8E098D08693A8452C99DB5342DE4DBBD3490CA33FB808F
          775AODBB3C9E72A6749CDCF1D25EAE75E77303COAD5ECFBB39150B03B5AE5007C2525D791560EB
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                     EXECUTIVE ORDER

                       PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


                                      Draft 8/17/98, 2:30 pm


By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United
States of America, and in order to improve the safety of the food supply through
science-based regulation and well coordinated inspection, enforcement, research and
education programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

(a)     There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council
shall comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Director of the National Partnership for
Reinventing Government, the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce, and the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget. The Council shall consult with other Federal
agencies, State and local government agencies as well as with consumer,producer, and industry
groups, as appropriate.

(b)    The Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Assistant to the
President for Domestic Policy shall serve as Joint Chairs ofthe Council. Council members may
designate senior executive branch officials as their representatives.

Section 2. Purpose.

The purpose of the Council shall be to develop a comprehensive strategic plan for Federal food
safety activities taking into consideration the findings and recommendations of the National
Academy of Science report "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption" and other
input from the public on how to improve the effectiveness of the current food safety system. The
Council shall make recornmendations to the President on how to advance Federal efforts to
implement a science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply and
to enhance coordination among Federal agencies, State and local governments, and the private
sector. The Council shall advise federal agencies in setting priority areas for investment in food
safety.

Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

(a)    The Council shall develop a comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan that
contains specific recommendations on needed changes including measurable outcome goals.
The fundamental goal of the plan should be the establishment of a seamless, science-based food
key public health, resource, and management issues regarding food safety. The planning process
should consider both short and long-term issues including new and emerging threats and the
special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the elderly. In developing this
plan, the Council shall consult with all interested parties, including state and local agencies,
consumers, producers, industry, and academia.

(b)     Consistent with the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan described in Section
3(a), the Council shall advise agencies of priority areas for investment in food safety and ensure
that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets for submission to
OMB that sustain and strengthen existing capacities, eliminate duplication, and ensure the
most effective use of resources for improving food safety, and the Council shall also develop
a unified budget for the President's Food Safety Initiative and such other food safety issues
as the Council determines appropriate for submission to OMB.

[c]     The Council shall ensure that the Joint Institute of Food Safety Research (JIFSR), in
consultation with the National Science and Technology Council, establishes mechanisms to
guide Federal research efforts toward the highest priority food safety needs. The JIFSR shall
report, on a regular basis, to the Council on its efforts to develop a strategic plan for conducting
food safety research activities consistent with the President's Food Safety Initiative and such
other food safety as the JIFSR determines appropriate and to coordinate efficiently all federal
food safety research, including with the private sector and academia.

Section 4. Cooperation.

        All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, promote partnerships and
cooperation with states and other public and private sector efforts wherever possible to improve
the safety of the food supply.

Section 5. General Provisions.

        This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at
law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers or any person. Nothing in this
order shall abrogate the statutory responsibilities of any federal agency charged with food safety
responsibilities.




                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

MEMORANDUM FOR                THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY

SUBJECT:                      NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES REPORT

        My Administration is committed to ensuring that the American people enjoy the safest
food possible. We have made great progress by implementing science-based inspection systems
for meat, poultry, and seafood; developing a comprehensive initiative to ensure the safety of
domestic and imported fruits and vegetables; and launching an interagency food safety initiative
that targets key food safety issues from the farm to the table. But we can and must continue to
build upon these efforts.

        Under our current food safety system, several different agencies have responsibility for
improving food safety. Within the framework of our interagency initiative, we have taken a
number of steps to improve the coordination of our efforts in order to maximize our resources
and more effectively improve food safety. Most recently, we established a Joint Institute for
Food Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan for conducting food safety research
activities and will coordinate efficiently all Federal food safety research, including with the
private sector and academia.

        Today, I signed an Executive Order establishing the President's Council on Food Safety.
To strengthen and focus our efforts to coordinate food safety policy and resources and improve
food safety for American consumers, the Council will develop a comprehensive strategic plan for
Federal food safety activities, ensure the most effective use of Federal resources, and oversee
the Joint Institute of Food Safety Research.

       Today I direct the Council to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report,
"Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption." After providing opportunity for public
comment, including public meetings, the Council shall report back to me within 180 days with its
response to the NAS report. The Council's report should consider appropriate additional actions
to improve safety and should take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety
plan which the Council will be developing.

       I thank you for all of your efforts to improve food safety, and I look forward to your
continued leadership on the President's Food Safety Council.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


