RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-AUG-1998 13:34:05.00

SUBJECT:   Drafts of executive order and directive

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft of the executive order and the directive regarding the NAS
study.   OMB, USDA, OSTP, and EPA are all pretty much fine with it.   Other
than the issues with the composition of the Council, this is ready to go
into formal OMB clearance.    Please let me know if we can put it in
clearance.   They will need at a day or a day and a half to go through
this clearance. So if we need it for the Saturday radio address, we
should probably put it in clearance at the latest on Wednesday.    Also
when I get a copy of the latest federal register notice, I will fax it to
you. Thanks, Mary==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D95]MAIL421480033.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750432C050000010A02010000000205000000E01E000000020000A7DC86DBD5205B9784F8DF
27BBEFCA81FABD77B79D69DA16CEDCB255988AB5102035689690331D9FS1SED33FA867BFDCSS18
FC06DBS2207FDC049902DS3D16BFFCA3DICSA268E4BC490EFAA6DF6091SECDS7AF4SDEBSB6F7D7
674426D64B9DS8E691091440BEOSAC403ASADFAE6CS9SDDS6BCF7112FACF12A9B34281443CFA77

                       PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


                                      Draft 8/18/98, 2:00 pm


By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United
States of America, and in order to improve the safety of the food supply through
science-based regulation and well coordinated inspection, enforcement, research and
education programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

(a)     There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council
shall comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Director of the National Partnership for
Reinventing Government, the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce, and the
Director ofthe Office of Management and Budget. The Council shall consult with other Federal
agencies, State and local government agencies as well as with consumer,producer, and industry
groups, as appropriate.

(b)    The Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Assistant to the
President for Domestic Policy shall serve as Joint Chairs of the Council.

Section 2. Purpose.

The purpose of the Council shall be to develop a comprehensive strategic plan for Federal food
safety activities taking into consideration the findings and recommendations of the National
Academy of Science report "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption" and other
input from the public on how to improve the effectiveness of the current food safety system. The
Council shall make recommendations to the President on how to advance Federal efforts to
implement a science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply and
to enhance coordination among Federal agencies, State and local governments, and the private
sector. The Council shall advise federal agencies in setting priority areas for investment in food
safety.

Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

(a)     The Council shall develop a comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan that
contains specific recommendations on needed changes including measurable outcome goals.
The fundamental goal of the plan should be the establishment of a seamless, science-based food
safety system. The plan should address the steps necessary to achieve this goal, including the

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
should consider both short and long-term issues including new and emerging threats and the
special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the elderly. In developing this
plan, the Council shall consult with all interested parties, including state and local agencies,
consumers, producers, industry, and academia.

(b)     Consistent with the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan described in Section
3(a), the Council shall advise agencies of priority areas for investment in food safety and ensure
that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets for submission to
OMB that sustain and strengthen existing capacities, eliminate duplication, and ensure the
most effective use of resources for improving food safety, and the Council shall also develop
a unified budget for submission to OMB for the President's Food Safety Initiative and such
other food safety issues as the Council determines appropriate.

[c)     The Council shall ensure that the Joint Institute of Food Safety Research (JIFSR), in
consultation with the National Science and Technology Council, establishes mechanisms to
guide Federal research efforts toward the highest priority food safety needs. The JIFSR shall
report, on a regular basis, to the Council on its efforts to develop a strategic plan for conducting
food safety research activities consistent with the President's Food Safety Initiative and such
other food safety as the JIFSR determines appropriate and to coordinate efficiently all federal
food safety research, including with the private sector and academia.

Section 4. Cooperation.

        All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, promote partnerships and
cooperation with states and other public and private sector efforts wherever possible to improve
the safety of the food supply.

Section 5. General Provisions.

        This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at
law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers or any person. Nothing in this
order shall abrogate the statutory responsibilities of any federal agency charged with food safety
responsibilities.




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

    Draft 8-18-98 2:00pm

    MEMORANDUM FOR                 THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY

    SUBJECT:                      NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES REPORT

            My Administration is committed to ensuring that the American people enjoy the safest
    food possible. We have made great progress by implementing science-based inspection systems
    for meat, poultry, and seafood; developing a comprehensive initiative to ensure the safety of
    domestic and imported fruits and vegetables; and launching an interagency food safety initiative
    that focuses on key food safety issues from the farm to the table. We, however, can and must
    continue to build upon these efforts.

           Under our current food safety system, several different agencies have responsibility for
    improving food safety. Within the framework of our interagency initiative, we have taken a
    number of steps to improve the coordination of our efforts to maximize the use of resources and
    more effectively improve food safety. Most recently, we established a Joint Institute for Food
    Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan for conducting food safety research activities
    and will coordinate efficiently all Federal food safety research, including with the private sector
    and academia.

            Today, I signed an Executive Order establishing the President's Council on Food Safety.
    To strengthen and focus our efforts to coordinate food safety policy and resources and improve
    food safety for American consumers, the Council will develop a comprehensive strategic plan for
    Federal food safety activities, ensure the most effective use of Federal resources, and oversee
    the Joint Institute of Food Safety Research.

           Today I direct the Council to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report,
    "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption." After providing opportunity for public
    comment, including public meetings, the Council shall report back to me within 180 days with its
    response to the NAS report. The Council's report should consider appropriate additional actions
    to improve safety and should take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety
    plan which the Council will be developing.

           I thank you for all of your efforts to improve food safety, and I look forward to your
    continued leadership on the President's Food Safety Council.




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


