RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-AUG-1998 16:48:45.00

SUBJECT:   AP press inquiry on NAS study

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Jim O'Hara said that HHS has already received a press inquiry on the NAS
study from AP.  He thinks that AP will put out the story tonight or
tomorrow morning for embargo until noon tomorrow. Here is a draft Q&A
that are the agencies are vetting right now.  They are supposed to get
back to me within the hour on the Q&A.  Are you fine with HHS talking with
AP? Let me know, Mary ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D11]MAIL423112133.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D2120000010A020100000002050000003543000000020000966B5C3273D2157E32C708
BEFA2EC55CID3DE179F8EDA2794853D3A9D5AF2DEB3036145A9388C4A06F3B133D525177C5B910
D89825F43D5FE5801AAC96E6DA03C862633F9EA66FAF4DF89A40DBOC9D23880B9901A264FC6625
6D5CC2E699473DD416DF218AD9511B6F2E6E187A65374860704165E85B99BBE2E9D7D67E2406D7
                     QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON NATIONAL
                         ACADEMY OF SCIENCES STUDY
                                August 19, 1998

Q:    What Does the NAS report say?

A:    The National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food From Production to
      Consumption," makes three basic conclusions: (1) an effective and efficient food safety
      system must be based in science; (2) the current statutes governing food safety must be
      revised in order to achieve a food safety system based on science; and (3) Congress must
      enact legislation to establish a unified and central framework for managing federal food
      safety programs which should be headed by a single official who has the responsibility
      and control of resources for all federal food safety activities.

Q:    Does the Adminstration agree with the NAS report?

A:    The Administration welcomes the opportunity to seriously review the NAS report and
      hopes that the report can play an important role in leading to further improvements. The
      Administration is encouraged that the NAS report recommends many of the initiatives
      already underway. The President has initiated a Food Safety Initiative to put in place
      new science-based preventative systems to improve the safety of seafood, meat, and
      poultry and to establish a new early waming system to help detect and respond to
      outbreaks of foodbome illness. Specifically, the President has already undertaken efforts
      which are recommended by the NAS report such as implementing the science-based
      Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system for inspections of meat,
      poultry, and seafood. In addition, the Administration has introduced legislation that will
      ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and other food products that do
      not meet U.S. food safety requirements or that came from countries that do not provide
      the same level of protection as is required for U.S. products. This legislation gives FDA
      authority that is similar to USDA's existing authority to prevent the importation of unsafe
      meat and poultry. The NAS report also highlights the role of Congress in ensuring food
      safety, and the Administration urges Congress to pass its FDA import legislation and
      legislation that would permit USDA to mandate recalls of meat. Finally, the
      Administration looks forward to working with Congress to fully fund its Food Safety
      Initiative.

Q:    The NAS report focuses on the coordination of food safety activities. How does the
      federal government already coordinate its food safety activities?

A:    In less than two years, the Clinton Administration has taken significant strides toward
      building a coordinated food safety system. Most recently, the President announced the
      creation ofthe Joint Institute for Food Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan


                                               1
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
      food safety research, including with the private sector and academia. In addition, the
      Administration announced the Foodbome Outbreak Response Coordinating Group
      (FORC-G) which brings together federal, state, and local agencies to develop a
      comprehensive, coordinated, national foodbome illness response system. The
      Administration also has provided for increased and targeted surveillance of foodbome
      illness through PulseNet and FoodNet. PulseNet is a national network of public health
      laboratories that perform DNA "fingerprinting" on foodbome pathogens and compares
      these patterns through an electronic database at the Centers for Disease Control and
      Prevention. FoodNet is a collaborative effort b~tween USDA, FDA, CDC and seven
      selected sites throughout the United States to track major pathogens that cause sporadic
      illness, and to explore what associations may exist between cases and the types of food
      products consumed. Finally, the federal agencies cooperate on risk assessment through
      the Interagency Risk Assessment Consortium.

Q:    Does the Administration agree with the NAS recommendation that there be a single
      official who has the responsibility and control of resources for all federal food safety
      activities?

A:    The Administration certainly agrees that there should be greater coordination of federal
      food safety activities, and has made several significant steps toward this coordination.
      The Administration will set up a process to seriously consider and review the NAS report
      and to respond to it.

Q:    What about the NAS report's recommendation regarding a National Food Safety
      Plan?

A:    The Administration already has efforts underway to develop a comprehensive strategic
      Federal food safety plan with the cooperation of consumers, producers, industry, food
      service providers, retailers, health professionals, state and local governments, tribes,
      academia, and the public. The strategic plan will focus not only on microbial
      contamination, but the full range of issues and actions necessary to ensure the safety of
      the food Americans eat and the water they drink. The plan will be used to set priorities,
      improve coordination and efficiency, identify gaps in the current system, and enhance and
      strengthen prevention strategies.

Food Safety Budget

Q:    What did the President ask for in the FY 1999 Budget request with respect to food
      safety?

A:    The FY 1999 Budget included a $101 million (or 12 percent) increase over the FY 1998
      level for the Administration's inter-agency food safety initiative. Of this total amount,


                                               2           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
       foods. Another $24 million ofthe Initiative would go towards: developing a rapid test
       for the detection of pathogens; improving slaughter and processing systems to avoid
       contamination of food products; and establishing a baseline of data to better assess the
       risk of contamination in the US food supply. In addition, $7.8 million would be used to
       expand consumer education initiatives, especially for high risk populations (the elderly
       and children).

Q:     What is the status of the Food Safety Initiative in the FY 1999 Appropriation bills?

A:     The Senate Agriculture Appropriations bill contained an amendment offered by
       Senator Harkin which would provide $68 million for funding of the President's food
       safety initiative. The amendment received strong hi-partisan support and passed
       66-33. Senator Harkin's amendment required USDA's tobacco program
       administrative costs to be fully-funded by the tobacco industry, and used the savings
       to offset the cost of expanded food safety programs for both USDA and FDA. The
       House-passed Agriculture Appropriations bill would provide $16.8 million of the
       requested increase: $7 million for FDA import inspections and $9.8 million for USDA
       activities. The Administration will continue to work with the conference committee
       members to urge them to provide full funding for the food safety initiative.

Q:    Is all of the $101 million that the President asked for necessary for food safety?

A:     Without additional funding for the Food Safety Initiative, the Administration will not be
       able to fully develop appropriate responses, prevention, and control strategies for
       reducing the level of food-borne illness in the United States.

      In addition to the funding requested to strengthen FDA's import inspection and expand
      USDA's and FDA's research and education activities, funding is requested to continue to
      improve FDA's food safety infrastructure, as started in the FY 1998 Food Safety
      Initiative. Also, significant resources are targeted to strengthening both USDA's and
      FDA's risk assessment capabilities. Risk assessment is important in helping to identify
      foods and processes that are most likely to lead to food-borne illness. Finally, funding is
      requested to expand the USDA's and HHS's ability identify and track food-borne
      illnesses.

Legislative Proposals

Q:    What is the Administration's FDA import legislation?

A:    This legislation, introduced by Senators Milkulski and Kennedy and Reps. Eshoo and
      Pallone, that gives the FDA greater authority over imported foods. This legislation will
      ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and other food products that do


                                               3          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
     the same level of protection as is required for U.S. products. The legislation also enables
     the FDA to halt imports from a country or facility that refuses to allow FDA inspections.
     This legislation gives FDA authority that is similar to USDA's existing authority to
     prevent the importation of unsafe meat and poultry.

Q:   What is the Administration's USDA mandatory recall/civil penalties legislation?

A:   The Administration urges passage of the Food Safety Enforcement Enhancement
     Act, sponsored by Senators Harkin, Daschle, Johnson, and Leahy, which gives
     USDA the ability to assess civil fines and to order mandatory recalls of unsafe meat
     and poultry products. Currently, the USDA can respond to food safety violations
     only by bringing criminal actions or withdrawing inspections; all recalls are done on
     a voluntary basis and no civil penalties are available. This new legislation will give
     USDA additional enforcement tools to prevent consumers from ingesting and
     becoming ill from dangerous meat and poultry.

Q:   Aren't these legislative proposals essentially dead? Has Congress moved on them
     at all?

A:   These proposals are not dead. The Administration is working with members to try to get
     these vital pieces ofiegislation passed and expects the Congressional sponsors of these
     measures to raise the bills on the House and Senate floors.




                                              4           Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


