      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN;Mary L. Smith/OU;OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-AUG-1998 13:29:08.00

      SUBJECT:   NAS Briefing

      TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      The following are the main points from the NAS briefing.

      Their conclusions were:

      1.     That our food safety system must be based on science
      2.      That the statutes governing the food safety need to be revised
      because these statutes are not always framed so that the statute is
      science-based
               -- As part of the No.2,   we should develop a comprehensive
      national food safety plan
               -- they emphasized repeatedly that we should coordinate more with
      states and local governments in doing this planning process (which we are
      going to do in the executive order)
      3.   That Congress should establish, by statute, a "unified and central
      framework for managing federal food safety programs, one that is headed by
      a single official" who has both responsibility for the planning and the
      accompanying resources
               -- the NAS made clear that No. 3 is not recommending a single food
      agency
              -- in the report the NAS didn't layout how this "central
      framework" would look like
              -- However, they were very adamant that there be only one
      individual with responsibility for food safety.    They were quick to point
      out that they were not recommending a "czar." They had defined czar as
      someone who is appointed by the President and who does not have authority
      over budget resources.   They said that this single person should be
      authorized by statute so that this person would be less influenced by
      political pressure and that the person must have, as they put it, the
      authority, the responsibility, and the resources

      The NAS also made clear that they did not point out specifically how
      budget resources should be allocated, but only pointed out where there are
      gaps in the current system are.

      The next steps for the NAS are to wait to hear back from Congress as to
      whether Congress wants them to do a second phase of the study.   This
      study grew out of last year's Ag appropriations bill, and if Congress
      wants followup, they would probably decide that in this year's Ag approps
      conference.


      I will get some Q&A to you later in the afternoon.   Also -- is this going


       to be the radio address --if so, we should get the executive order in the
       OMB process today.   Thanks, Mary
