     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:20-AUG-1998 11:21:54.00

     SUBJECT:   Q&A with your changes

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [OPD ) )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Let me know if you want me to send it out to the press office and the
     usual list of persons.  Thanks==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ==================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o 00:00:00.00
     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D60)MAIL40702513D.226 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF575043D2120000010A02010000000205000000ED400000000200OOAODCA79F14D940E04E916D
     3B9119D7FB7A174EF7512AD4E46604CD59570E5B72EE6EODEA177154DF93200E95F26ACB24CODE
     49C080402BF930F2BC51D42450D9889128FA322BB9511624C98F506B74F490FDA4A29AOA12A3EF
     6693E8446048A65B4652E2205310F1651BED371COF4AB173C4393ACAC7D06608D3640CFF5C7F7B
     A5BB2D818731EED78CD3B45C9971F1B8593BCDED3C67D84B7F1596lDE1EEDBE5D603ED3AF2169A
                        ACADEMY OF SCIENCES STUDY
                               August 20,1998

Q:   What Does the NAS report say?

A:   The National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food From Production to
     Consumption," makes three basic conclusions: (1) an effective and efficient food safety
     system must be based on science; (2) the current statutes governing food safety should be
     revised in order to achieve a food safety system based on science; and (3) Congress
     should enact legislation to establish a unified and central framework for managing federal
     food safety programs, which should be headed by a single official with responsibility for
     all federal food safety activities.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS report?

A:   The Administration welcomes the opportunity to review the NAS report and believes that
     the report will play an important role in leading to further improvements. The
     Administration is encouraged that the NAS report supports many current Administration
     initiatives such as:
     ·        new science-based systems to prevent contamination, including the Hazard
              Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system for inspections of meat,
              poultry, and seafood;
     ·        a new science-based early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks
              of foodborne illness; and
     ·        proposed legislation to ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and
              other food products that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or come from
              countries that do not provide the same level of protection as is required for U.S.
              products.

     The NAS report also highlights the role of Congress in ensuring food safety, and the
     Administration urges Congress to pass its FDA import legislation, to pass additional
     legislation to permit USDA to mandate recalls of meat and poultry, and to provide full
     funding for the Administration's Food Safety Initiative.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS recommendation that there be a single
     official who has responsibility and control of resources for all federal food safety
     activities?

A:   The Administration certainly agrees that there should be greater coordination of federal
     food safety activities, and has made several significant steps toward this coordination.
     While continuing these efforts at greater coordination consistent with the current statutory
     scheme, the Administration will ensure full consideration of the NAS's proposal for


                                               1
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

Q:    The NAS report focuses on the coordination of food safety activities. How does the
      federal government already coordinate its food safety activities?

A:    In less than two years, the Clinton Administration has taken significant strides toward
      building a coordinated food safety system. Most recently, the President announced the
      creation of the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan
      for coordinating government and private food safety research activities. In addition, the
      Administration announced the Foodborne Outbreak Response Coordinating Group
      (FORC-G) which brings together federal, state, and local agencies to develop a
      comprehensive, coordinated, national foodbome illness response system.

      The Administration also has provided for increased and targeted surveillance of
      foodborne illness through PulseNet and FoodNet. PulseNet is a national network of
      public health laboratories that perform DNA "fingerprinting" on foodborne pathogens and
      compares these patterns through an electronic database at the Centers for Disease Control
      and Prevention. FoodNet is a collaborative effort between USDA, FDA, CDC and seven
      selected sites throughout the United States to track major pathogens that cause sporadic
      illness, and to explore what associations may exist between cases and the types of food
      products consumed.

Q:    What about the NAS report's recommendation regarding a National Food Safety
      Plan?

A:    The Administration already has efforts underway to develop a comprehensive strategic
      Federal food safety plan with the cooperation of consumers, producers, industry, food
      service providers, retailers, health professionals, state and local governments, tribes,
      academia, and the public. The strategic plan will focus not only on microbial
      contamination, but on the full range of issues and actions necessary to ensure the safety of
      the food Americans eat. The plan will be used to set priorities, improve coordination and
      efficiency, identify gaps in the current system, and enhance and strengthen prevention
      strategies.

Food Safety Budget

Q:    What did the President ask for in the FY 1999 Budget request with respect to food
      safety?

A:    The FY 1999 Budget included a $101 million increase over the FY 1998 level for the
      Administration's inter-agency food safety initiative. Ofthis total amount, $25 million
      would finance FDA's improved capability to ensure the safety of imported foods.
      Another $24 million of the Initiative would go towards: developing rapid tests for the


                                                  2
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
       contamination of food products; and establishing baseline data to better assess the risk of
       contamination in the US food supply. In addition, $7.8 million would be used to expand
       consumer education initiatives, especially for high risk populations (the elderly and
       children).

Q:     What is the status of the Food Safety Initiative in the FY 1999 Appropriation bills?

A:    So far, Congress has failed to provide full funding of the Administration's food
      safety initiative. The Senate Appropriations Committee provided only about $3
      million for these efforts, but the full Senate voted by a large bipartisan majority for
      an amendment offered by Senator Harkin to provide an additional $66 million.
      Senator Harkin's amendment required USDA's tobacco program administrative
      costs to be partially funded by the tobacco industry, and used the savings as the
      major offset for the cost of expanded food safety programs for both USDA and
      FDA. The House-passed Agriculture Appropriations bill would provide only $16.8
      million of the requested increase: $7 million for FDA imported food safety and $9.8
      million for USDA activities. The Administration will continue to work with the
      conference committee' members to urge them to provide full funding for the food safety
      initiative.

Q:     Is all of the $101 million that the President asked for necessary for food safety?

A:    Without additional funding for the Food Safety Initiative, the federal food safety agencies
      will not be able fully to develop appropriate response, prevention, and control strategies
      for reducing the level of food-borne illness in the United States.

      In addition to the funding requested to strengthen FDA's import inspection and expand
      USDA's and FDA's research and education activities, funding is requested to continue to
      improve FDA's food safety infrastructure, as started in the FY 1998 Food Safety
      Initiative. Also, significant resources are targeted to strengthening both USDA's and
      FDA's risk assessment capabilities. Risk assessment is important in helping to identify
      foods and processes that are most likely to lead to foodbome illness. Finally, funding is
      requested to expand the USDA's and HHS's ability to identify and track food-borne
      illnesses.

Legislative Proposals

Q:    What is the Administration's FDA import legislation?

A:    This legislation, introduced by Senators Milkulski and Kennedy and Reps. Eshoo and
      Pallone, gives the FDA greater authority over imported foods. This legislation will
      ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and other food products that do


                                                3
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion




              not meet U.S. food safety requirements or that come from countries that do not provide
              the same level of protection as is required for U.S. products. The legislation also enables
              the FDA to halt imports from a country or facility that refuses to allow FDA inspections.
              This legislation gives FDA authority that is similar to USDA's existing authority to
              prevent the importation of unsafe meat and poultry.

         Q:   What is the Administration's USDA mandatory recall/civil penalties legislation?

         A:   The Administration urges passage of the Food Safety Enforcement Enhancement
              Act, sponsored by Senators Harkin, Daschle, Johnson, and Leahy, which gives
              USDA the ability to assess civil fines and to order mandatory recalls of unsafe meat
              and poultry products. Currently, the USDA can respond to food safety violations
              only by bringing criminal actions or withdrawing inspections; all recalls are done on
              a voluntary basis and no civil penalties are available. This new legislation will give
              USDA additional enforcement tools to prevent consumers from ingesting and
              becoming ill from dangerous meat and poultry.

         Q:   Aren't these legislative proposals essentially dead? Has Congress moved on them
              at all?

         A:   These proposals are not dead. The Administration is working with members to try to get
              these vital pieces oflegislation passed and expects the Congressional sponsors of these
              measures to raise the bills on the House and Senate floors. We hope that the NAS report
              provides an additional spur to Congressional action.




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                       4              Hex-Dump Conversion


