   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

   CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

   CREATION DATE/TIME:20-AUG-1998 18:09:18.00

   SUBJECT:   Drafts of announcement and Q&A for food safety council

   TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD ] )
   READ:UNKNOWN

   CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
   READ:UNKNOWN

   CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
   READ:UNKNOWN

   TEXT:
   Here are drafts of the announcement and Q&A that have been vetted with
   OMB, USDA, FDA, HHS, and EPA. They're pretty much ready to go if we have
   to quickly.  Thanks, Mary ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
   ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

   TEXT:
   Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D70]MAIL412052233.226 to ASCII,
    The following is a HEX DUMP:

   FF57504304050000010A02010000000205000000A42800000002000077293DACE97ADE858E0367
   F287A77F9C799994E69ECC3DB777535B12FD82325286BB7B532E1AFD41F18C35FD382CS35B9AES
   4D1F5055E10AE24927DC46B18059CFAD2BOE6482FF3EF90C479DCOEC6DDD6D876BCAD1E9BD6BOA
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Draft 8-20-98
            THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCES COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY
                              August 22,1998

The President will announce a plan to create a President's Council on Food Safety, which will
develop a comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities and ensure that federal
agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets. This Council builds upon the
President's food safety initiative and his recent establishment of the Joint Institute for Food
Safety Research (JIFSR) which will develop a coordinated strategy for conducting food safety
research activities. The President also announced a directive to the Council, as one of its first
orders of business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe
Food from Production to Consumption," and to report back with its response to the report,
including appropriate additional actions to improve food safety. Finally, the President
announced the first public meeting to discuss the development of the comprehensive strategic
plan for federal food safety activities.

President's Council on Food Safety. Today the President will sign an executive order which
establishes a President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council will have three
primary functions, including: (1) developing a comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan;
(2) advising agencies of priority areas for investment in food safety and ensuring that federal
agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets; and (3) ensuring that the JIFSR
establishes mechanisms to guide federal research efforts toward the highest priority of food
safety needs.

      Comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan. The Council will develop a
       comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan that contains specific recommendations
       on needed changes including measurable outcome goals. The fundamental goal of the
       plan will be the establishment of a seamless, science-based food safety system. The plan
       will address the steps necessary to achieve this goal, including the key public health,
       resource, and management issues regarding food safety. The planning process will
       consider both short and long-term issues including new and emerging threats and the
       special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the elderly. In developing
       this plan, the Council will consult with all interested parties, including state and local
       agencies, tribes, consumers, producers, industry, and academia.

      Coordinated Federal Food Safety Budgets. Consistent with the comprehensive
       strategic Federal food safety plan, the Council will advise agencies of priority areas for
       investment in food safety and ensure that federal agencies annually develop coordinated
       food safety budgets for submission to OMB that sustain and strengthen existing
       capacities, eliminate duplication, and ensure the most effective use of resources for
       improving food safety. The Council will also develop a unified budget for
       submission to OMB for the President's Food Safety Initiative and such other food
       safety issues as the Council determines appropriate.

      Guiding Federal Food Safety Research Efforts. The Council will ensure that the
       JIFSR, in consultation with the National Science and Technology Council, establishes
       needs. The JIFSR will report, on a regular basis, to the Council on its efforts to develop
       a strategic plan for conducting food safety research activities consistent with the
       President's Food Safety Initiative and such other food safety activities as the JIFSR
       determines appropriate and to coordinate efficiently all federal food safety research,
       including with the private sector and academia.

Review ofNAS Report. Today the President also directed the Council, as one of its first orders
of business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe Food
from Production to Consumption." After providing opportunity for public comment, including
public meetings, the Council will report back to the President within 180 days with its response
to the NAS report. The Council's report will consider appropriate additional actions to improve
food safety and will take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan which
the Council will be developing.

Public Meeting to Develop Comprehensive Strategic Plan for Federal Food Safety
Activities. The President will announce publication of a notice of the first public meeting to be
held on October 2 in Arlington, Virginia, to begin development of a comprehensive strategic
plan for federal food safety activities. The meeting will engage consumers, producers, industry,
food service providers, retailers, health professionals, State and local governments, Tribes,
academia, and the public in the strategic planning process. The meeting will focus on how to
structure a strategic planning process that involves all interested parties and best addresses the
important food safety challenges of the future.




                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

The President's announcement builds on a strong record offood safety initiatives, ensuring that
Americans eat the safest possible food. The Administration has put into place improved safety
standards for meat, poultry, and seafood products, and has begun the process of developing
enhanced standards for fruit and vegetable juices. The Administration also has expanded
research, education, and surveillance activities throughout the food safety system.

*July 1998. Created a Joint Institute of Food Safety Research which will develop a strategic
plan for conducting food safety research activities and to coordinate efficiently all federal food
safety research, including with the private sector and academia.

*February 1998. Administration announces its proposed food safety budget, which requests an
approximate $101 million increase for food safety initiatives.

*May 1997. Administration announces comprehensive new initiative to improve the safety of
nation's food supply --"Food Safety from Farm to Table" -- detailing a $43 million food safety
program, including measures to improve surveillance, outbreak response, education, and
research.

*January 1997. President announces new Early-Warning System to gather critical scientific data
to help stop foodbome disease outbreaks quickly and to improve prevention systems.

*August 1996. President signs Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996. The law requires drinking
water systems to protect against dangerous contaminants like Cryptosporidium, and gives people
the right to know about contaminants in their tap water.

*August 1996. President signs Food Quality Protection Act of 1996, which streamlines
regulation of pesticides by FDA and EPA and puts important new public-health protections in
place, especially for children.

*July 1996. President Clinton announces new regulations that modernize the nation's meat and
poultry inspection system for the first time in 90 years. New standards help prevent E.coli
bacteria contamination in meat.

*December 1995. Administration issues new rules to ensure seafood safety, utilizing HACCP
regulatory programs to require food industries to design and implement preventive measures and
increase the industries' responsibility for and control of their safety assurance actions.

* 1994. CDC embarks on strategic program to detect, prevent, and control emerging infectious
disease threats, some of which are food borne, making significant progress toward this goal in
each successive year.

*1993. Vice-President's National Perfonnance Review issues report recommending
government and industry move toward a system of preventive controls.

                                                                   Automated Records Management Syslen
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
         QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON FOOD SAFETY RADIO ADDRESS
                            August 22,1998

Q:    What did the President say in his radio address?

A:    In his radio address, the President: (1) announced an executive order creating a
      President's Council on Food Safety, which will develop a comprehensive strategic plan
      for federal food safety activities and ensure that federal agencies annually develop
      coordinated food safety budgets; (2) directed to the Council, as one of its first orders of
      business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe
      Food from Production to Consumption," and to report back with its response to the
      report, including appropriate additional actions to improve food safety; and (3)
      announced the first public meeting to discuss the development of the comprehensive
      strategic plan for federal food safety activities.

President's Council on Food Safety

Q:    What will the President's Council on Food Safety do?

A:    The Council will have three primary functions, including: (l) developing a
      comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan; (2) advising agencies of priority areas
      for investment in food safety and ensuring that federal agencies annually develop
      coordinated food safety budgets; and (3) ensuring that the Joint Institute for Food Safety
      Research (JIFSR), which the President recently created to coordinate all federal food
      safety research, establishes mechanisms to guide federal research efforts toward the
      highest priority food safety needs.

      In addition, the Council, as one of its first orders of business, will review the National
      Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to
      Consumption." After providing opportunity for public comment, including public
      meetings, the Council will report back to the President within 180 days with its response
      to the NAS report. The Council's report will consider appropriate additional actions to
      improve food safety and will take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food
      safety plan which the Council will be developing.

Q:    Did the President create this Council because it is recommended by the NAS report?
       If so, why did he provide three co-chairs rather than a single chair as
      recommended by the NAS?

A:    The President created the Council as the next logical step in his efforts to further
      coordinate federal food safety efforts and not as a response to the NAS report. The
      Administration response is for the Council to review the NAS report, including its


                                                1
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              H~y-J)ump Conversion
     federal food safety activities.

Q:   Who are the members of the Council?

A:   The members ofthe Council are the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and
     Human Services, the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Director of the
     National Partnership for Reinventing Government, the Assistant to the President for
     Science and Technology, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the
     Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the
     Office of Management and Budget. The Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of
     Health and Human Services, and the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy will
     serve as Joint Chairs ofthe Council.

NAS Report

Q:   What Does the NAS report say?

A:   The National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food From Production to
     Consumption," makes three basic conclusions: (1) an effective and efficient food safety
     system must be based on science; (2) the current statutes governing food safety should be
     revised in order to achieve a food safety system based on science; and (3) Congress
     should enact legislation to establish a unified and central framework for managing federal
     food safety programs, which should be headed by a single official with responsibility for
     all federal food safety activities.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS report?

A:   The Administration welcomes the opportunity to review the NAS report and believes that
     the report will play an important role in leading to further improvements. The
     Administration is encouraged that the NAS report supports many current Administration
     initiatives such as:
             new science-based systems to prevent contamination, including the Hazard
              Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system for inspections of meat,
              poultry, and seafood;
             a new science-based early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks
              of foodborne illness; and
             proposed legislation to ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and
              other food products that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or come from
              countries that do not provide the sarne level of protection as is required for U.S.
              products.

     The NAS report also highlights the vital role of Congress in ensuring food safety. The


                                              2
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
     food safety. In fact, many of the recommendations contained in the NAS report can
     occur only with Congressional action, including creating a unified and central framework
     for managing federal food safety programs, which is headed by a single official.

     The Administration has taken many steps for improving the safety of the nation's food
     supply, including proposing legislation. The Administration urges Congress to pass its
     FDA import legislation, to pass additional legislation to give USDA more effective
     enforcement authority to mandate to mandate recalls of meat and poultry, and to provide
     full funding for the Administration's Food Safety Initiative.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS recommendation that there be a single
     official who has responsibility and control of resources for all federal food safety
     activities?

A:   The Administration certainly agrees that there should be greater coordination of federal
     food safety activities, and has made several significant steps toward this coordination.
     While continuing these efforts at greater coordination consistent with the current statutory
     scheme, the Administration will ensure full consideration of the NAS's proposal for
     legislation to give a single official responsibility for all food safety activities.

Q:   Despite the fact that the NAS report recommends that there be a single person in
     charge of food safety, why did the President establish a Council that has three
     co-chairs?

A:   The President established the Council as part of his overall strategy to better coordinate
     federal food safety efforts, and he believes that the Council is a logical next step in this
     coordinated effort. This Council builds upon the President's food safety initiative and
     his recent establishment of the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research (JIFSR) which
     will develop a coordinated strategy for conducting food safety research activities. In
     terms of the specific recommendations contained in the NAS study, the President today
     announced a process by which the Council will review and respond to the NAS report
     within 180 days. However, the concept of a Food Safety Council is only an example in
     the NAS report of a possible organizational structure to create a single federal voice for
     food safety.

Q:   The NAS report focuses on the coordination of food safety activities. How does the
     federal government already coordinate its food safety activities?

A:   In less than two years, the Clinton Administration has taken significant strides toward
     building a coordinated food safety system. Most recently, the President announced the
     creation of the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan
     for coordinating government and private food safety research activities. In addition, the


                                               3            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
      (FORC-G) which brings together federal, state, and local agencies to develop a
      comprehensive, coordinated, national foodbome illness response system.

      The Administration also has provided for increased and targeted surveillance of
      foodbome illness through PulseNet and FoodNet. PulseNet is a national network of
      public health laboratories that perform DNA "fingerprinting" on foodbome pathogens and
      compares these patterns through an electronic database at the Centers for Disease Control
      and Prevention. FoodNet is a collaborative effort between USDA, FDA, CDC and seven
      selected sites throughout the United States to track major pathogens that cause sporadic
      illness, and to explore what associations may exist between cases and the types of food
      products consumed.

Q:    What about the NAS report's recommendation regarding a National Food Safety
      Plan?

A:    The Administration already has efforts underway to develop a comprehensive strategic
      Federal food safety plan with the cooperation of consumers, producers, industry, food
      service providers, retailers, health professionals, state and local governments, tribes,
      academia, and the public. In fact, today the President announced publication of a notice
      of the first public meeting to be held on October 2 in Arlington, Virginia, to begin to
      develop a comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities. The strategic
      plan will focus not only on microbial contamination, but on the full range of issues and
      actions necessary to ensure the safety ofthe food Americans eat. The plan will be used
      to set priorities, improve coordination and efficiency, identify gaps in the current system,
      and enhance and strengthen prevention strategies.

Food Safety Budget

Q:    What did the President ask for in the FY 1999 Budget request with respect to food
      safety?

A:    The FY 1999 Budget included a $101 million increase over the FY 1998 level for the
      Administration's inter-agency food safety initiative. Ofthis total amount, $25 million
      would finance FDA's improved capability to ensure the safety of imported foods and $5
      million would permit the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to assist state health
      departments to detect foodbome diseases and to improve foodbome disease surveillance.
      Another $24 million of the Initiative would go towards: developing rapid tests for the
      detection of pathogens; improving slaughter and processing systems to avoid
      contamination of food products; and establishing baseline data to better assess the risk of
      contamination in the US food supply. In addition, $7.8 million would be used to expand
      consumer education initiatives, especially for high risk populations (the elderly and
      children).


                                                4          Automated Records Management Sysu:m
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

A:     So far, Congress has failed to provide full funding of the Administration's food
       safety initiative. The Senate Appropriations Committee provided only about $3
       million for these efforts, but the full Senate voted by a large bipartisan majority for
       an amendment offered by Senator Harkin to provide an additional $66 million.
       Senator Harkin's amendment required USDA's tobacco program administrative
       costs to be partially funded by the tobacco industry, and used the savings as the
       major offset for the cost of expanded food safety programs for both USDA and
       FDA. The House-passed Agriculture Appropriations bill would provide only $16.8
       million ofthe requested increase: $7 million for FDA imported food safety and $9.8
       million for USDA activities. The Administration will continue to work with the
       conference committee members to urge them to provide full funding for the food safety
       initiative. The House Labor-HHS Appropriations Committee has approved the $5
       million food safety request for CDC.

Q:     Is all of the $101 million that the President asked for necessary for food safety?

A:     Without additional funding for the Food Safety Initiative, the federal food safety agencies
       will not be able fully to develop appropriate response, prevention, and control strategies
       for reducing the level of food-borne illness in the United States.

      In addition to the funding requested to strengthen FDA's import inspection and expand
      USDA's and FDA's research and education activities, funding is requested to continue to
      improve FDA's food safety infrastructure, as started in the FY 1998 Food Safety
      Initiative. Also, significant resources are targeted to strengthening both USDA's and
      FDA's risk assessment capabilities. Risk assessment is important in helping to identify
      foods and processes that are most likely to lead to food-borne illness. Finally, funding is
      requested to expand the USDA's and HHS's ability to identify and track food-borne
      illnesses.


Legislative Proposals

Q:    What did the President say in his radio address about the FDA import legislation?

A:    The President called on Congress to pass food safety legislation, introduced by Senators
      Milkulski and Kennedy and Reps. Eshoo and Pallone, that gives the FDA greater
      authority over imported foods. This legislation will ensure that the FDA halts imports of
      fruits, vegetables, and other food products that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements
      or that come from countries that do not provide the same level of protection as is required
      for U.S. products. The legislation also enables the FDA to halt imports from a country
      or facility that refuses to allow FDA inspections. This legislation gives FDA authority


                                                5             Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
     poultry.

Q:   What did the President say in his radio address about the USDA mandatory
     recall/civil penalties legislation?

A:   The President called on Congress to pass the Food Safety Enforcement
     Enhancement Act, sponsored by Senators Harkin, Daschle, Johnson, and Leahy,
     which gives USDA the ability to assess civil fines and to order mandatory recalls of
     unsafe meat and poultry products. Currently, the USDA can respond to food
     safety violations only by bringing criminal actions or withdrawing inspections; all
     recalls are done on a voluntary basis and no civil penalties are available. This new
     legislation will give USDA additional enforcement tools to enhance food safety.

Q:   Aren't these legislative proposals essentially dead? Has Congress moved on them
     at all?

A:   These proposals are not dead. The Administration is working with members to try to get
     these vital pieces oflegislation passed and expects the Congressional sponsors of these
     measures to raise the bills on the House and Senate floors. We hope that the NAS report
     provides an additional spur to Congressional action.




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                             6
.---_.".



