    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL           (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:21-AUG-1998 16:46:14.00

    SUBJECT:           Country of Origin Labelling

    TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP           [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    An internal USDA memo was leaked regarding country of origin labeling.
    Here is what was on the web:
    Friday, August 21, 1998
         An inside-the-Beltway, inside-the-hallways visit with
         Jim Wiesemeyer, Pro Farmer's Washington Bureau Chief


                  USDA internal memo urges opposition to Senate
                  meat labeling bill

         You know a topic's importance, sometimes, by the number of letters
    written about
         it. If that is indeed the case, the matter of a Senate meat labeling
    bill sure is
         important. Today's dispatch takes a look at some of those
    memos/letters, and the
         likely outcome of the issue in Congress.



         I love a good internal memo ... and the topic of a current one is some
    USDA officials'
         opposition to a Senate-passed meat labeling bill. Here's a Pro Farmer
    Internet link
         to the confidential memo. Highlights:

                      Who wrote it: Thomas J. Billy, administrator of USDA's Food
    Safety &
                      Inspection Service, and Lon S. Hatamiya, administrator of USDA's
                      Foreign Ag Service.
                      Who got the memo: Catherine E. Woteki, Undersecretary for food
                      safety, and Gus Schumacher, Undersecretary for farm and foreign
                      agriculture service.
                      What it says: It urges USDA to officially oppose the Senate meat
                      labeling amendment, which is part of the Fiscal Year 1999 Agricul
    ture
                      appropriations bill.

                           The amendment would require fresh muscle cuts of beef
                           and lamb, and ground or other processed beef and lamb, to
                           be labeled as U.S. beef, U.S. lamb, imported beef, imported
                           lamb, or with the percentage content of U.S. and imported
                           beef/lamb contained in the product.

                           The amendment does not apply to other meat products,


                  such as pork or poultry.

          What the officials are concerned about: Difficulties in
enforcement it
          will create, its excessive costs, its lack of food safety or
consumer
          benefits, "and perhaps most importantly, its potentially
negative trade
          impact."

          Unfunded costs: The memo reveals that USDA's Office of Chief
          Economist estimates the minimum annual cost to monitor for
compliance to
          be at least $60 million for FSIS, which equates to more than 10%
of
          that agency's entire budget!

             Trade implications: While the U.s. beef trade deficit with
Canada has
          been widening, there continues to be a large trade imbalance in
live cattle.
          Ninety percent of the cattle imported from Canada go directly to
          slaughter. But the memo says that in looking at the total
international
          picture, the value of U.s. meat exports is much higher than our
imports.

                 "If other countries mirrored this proposed legislation, we
                 would have more to lose than to gain," the memo
                 concludes.

                 Another problem cited: The memo also notes that the bill
                 indirectly endorses the concept that the origin of an
animal is
                 determined by certain residency or weight gain criteria. "If
                 the WTO adopts weight gain or various residency
                 country-of-origin requirements, which would be imposed on
                 U.S. exports, it would have severe consequences for U.s.
                 meat exports," according to the memo.

                 The memo's authors charge the bill "undermines our
                 efforts to challenge mandatory country-of-origin labeling
                 being imposed in the European Union on beef sold at the
                 retail level beginning in the year 2000."

           Legal issues: The amendment could conflict with WTO marking rules
           and undermine the U.S. position in the WTO negotiations to
harmonize the
           rules of origin, the memo says. They add it runs counter to U.s.
efforts to
           fight against EU labeling requirements.

     Senate sponsors signal they may change certain provisions of the
amendment.
     In an Aug. 11 letter to Senate Appropriations agriculture
subcommittee chairman Thad
     Cochran (R-Miss.) and ranking member Dale Bumpers (D-Ark.), Sen. Tim
Johnson
     (D-S.D.) notes that, "In light of some additional trade-related
concerns directed


     towards the meat labeling amendment, my staff will be contacting
committee staff to
     propose certain technical changes to the language to address some of
these concerns."

             Johnson's letter reveals that the Senate amendment wasn't
accurately
             reprinted in the Congressional Record because it omitted language
             allowing for voluntary U.S. country-of-origin labeling.

             Here's a Pro Farmer Internet link to Sen. Johnson's letter to
Sens.
             Cochran and Bumpers.

     Canada issues strong negative reaction to Senate amendment. The
proposed
     U.S. legislation dominated discussions at the annual convention of
the Canadian
     Cattlemen's Association held in Edmonton, Alberta. And the matter has
also been the
     subject of discussion in a series of letters between Sen. Johnson,
House Ag Committee
     Chairman Bob Smith (R-Oregon) and Canadian Ambassador Raymond
Chretien.

             In a letter dated Aug. 7 to Sen. Johnson, Chretien wrote that the
             proposed origin labeling provisions "would significantly disrupt
the way in
             which our highly integrated beef industries conduct trade across
our
          shared border and fly in the face of joint initiatives such as
the facilitation
          of U.S. feeder cattle exports to Canada under the Northwest
Cattle
          Project."

             Chretien also said the amendment would "also encourage other
             countries to adopt similar measures to restrict imports of North
             American beef."

                 A watch-out warning: The Canadian ambassador added
                 that "Ironically, if this proposed new requirement is
                 implemented, any beef from U.S.-born cattle placed in
                 Canadian feedlots, however briefly and regardless of
                 whether the cattle remained under U.S. ownership, would
                 also have to be labeled as 'imported,' even if ultimately
                 processed."

                 Here's a Pro Farmer Internet link to Chretien's letter to
                 Sen. Johnson.

     Sen. Johnson says legislation will have a "minuscule impact" on
consumer
     prices. In a letter to Canada's Chretien dated Aug. 5, Johnson says
that according to a
     survey conducted by USDA, the labeling of beef and lamb products
would cost only 20
     to 30 cents annually per consumer.

         A national survey in late 1995, Johnson wrote, found that nearly


three
             out of four American consumers (74%) favored labeling by country
of
             origin. "I suspect Canadian consumers are equally supportive of
labeling,"
             Johnson said.

             Here's a Pro Farmer Internet link to Sen.   Johnson's letter to
Chretien.

     House ag committee chairman calls for U.S.-Canadian trade issue
summit. In a
     letter to Canada's Chretien, House ag panel Chairman Smith proposes
that the
     legislative and ministerial leaders of the two governments meet this
fall to make progress
     on ag trade issues confronting the two nations.

             Who Smith wants at the ag trade issue summit: Smith suggested
that
             Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food Minister Lyle VanClief,   a
group of
          parliamentary ag leaders, and if appropriate, provincial
officials, come to
          Washington in September to meet with USDA Secretary Dan Glickman
          and U.S. congressional agriculture leaders.

          "No single meeting will be the panacea to end all of the
competitive
          trade issues between us," Smith wrote, "but an agricultural
summit this fall
          would be a good first step toward a more harmonious
relationship. This is
          particularly important with the 1999 WTO agricultural
negotiations
          looming upon us."

             Here's a Pro Farmer Internet link to Smith's letter to Chretien.

     The National Cattlemen's Beef Association has come out strongly in
favor of the
     Senate amendment, but U.S. meat processors have taken the opposition
position. The
     American Meat Institute (AMI) says the policy is "ill-conceived and
short-sighted
     domestic policy and shockingly dumb trade policy."

             Meat-grinding comments: AMI's J. Patrick Boyle, in a letter to
U.S.
             Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky,   recalled that Canada
has
           "consistently copied and used against us almost every
ill-conceived trade
          policy instrument devised to constrain imports of products into
the U.S.
          market. With the nation's beef industry struggling to maintain
market share
          in both U.S. and foreign markets, advocates of this initiative
appear to be
          providing the same kind of leadership for the nation's beef


industry that
          General Custer provided for the 7th Cavalry."

         Here's a Pro Farmer Internet link to AMI's letter.

     Bottom line: The Clinton administration has not yet taken a formal
position on the
     amendment. Neither has USDA, despite the internal memo. But unless
some
     inconsistent provisions, especially as they relate to the World Trade
Organization, are
     not modified, the amendment faces a rocky road to approval once
House-Senate
     conferees meet on the differing ag appropriations bills. The House
version does not
     contain the meat labeling provision.

          Also, it appears the House Ways and Means Committee is ready
          to claim jurisdiction over the labeling plan since it affects
trade. This
          alone could doom the labeling requirement. A compromise might
be, as
          the USDA internal memo suggests, a study on various types of
labeling.

    Aug. 21-- 10:45am CT Return to Pro F
--   .
