     RECORD TYPE:   PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Cecilia E.     Rouse   (CN=Cecilia E.   Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP              [ OPD ]    )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 25-AUG-1998 18: 36: 54.00

     SUBJECT:   H -lB memo for the VP

     TO: Sally Katzen      ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP     @   EOP   [ OPD ]       )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan    ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP     @   EOP [ OPD ]         )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B.      Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP           @   EOP [ OPD ]          )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Julie A. Fernandes      ( CN=Julie A.   Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP           @   EOP     [ OPD ]    )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Shannon Mason     ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP        @   EOP   [ OPD]        )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett      ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP     @   EOP   [ WHO ]       )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G.        Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP         @   EOP [ OPD ]          )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Gene, Sally,   and Elena:

     Attached is a draft of the memo for the VP in preparation for his trip to
     Silicon Valley and his meeting with Morty Barr and Co.  David Beier had
     originally asked for the memo this evening, but has given us a "reprieve"
     until tomorrow.  This memo has also been reviewed (and worked over!) by
     Julie and Peter J.

     -- ceci

     ==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00: 00: 00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D23]MAIL42390373S.226 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF575043C9040000010A02010000000205000000A650000000020000E8E3F63105606652C97A51
     9FAB02FF4A31B9EC854E8516790B64FD7417500F7064AB13C47C284FBCF6AEBFF2A9EBDB4EIA04
     A5350EOA0968CC4FE73FB2A66F770B3D77009BEFOB6838991CD4BD719E6B4A52COA19216B2325A

DRAFT MEMORANDUM FOR THE VICE-PRESIDENT

FROM:          GENE SPERLING                                      Automated Records Management System
               ELENA KAGAN                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
SUBJECT:       STATUS OF H-IB LEGISLATION

Background

         H-IB visas are temporary work visas that allow "highly skilled" immigrants (with a BA
or equivalent) to work in this country for up to six years. Under current law, the number of
H-IB visas is capped at 65,000 per year. During the last fiscal year, this cap was reached for the
first time. This fiscal year the cap was reached in early May; as a result, no more visas can be
issued until October 1. The information technology (IT) industry strongly supports raising the
annual cap to address what it maintains is a shortage of U.S . workers with IT skills. Others,
including the Department of Labor and organized labor, challenge the industry's conclusions
about a shortage and are concerned that the current H-IB program does not target its use to
employers who are experiencing skills shortages.

        Until last month there were two legislative vehicles for increasing the cap on the number
ofH-IB visas. On May 18, the Senate passed (78-20) an industry-backed bill sponsored by
Senator Abraham (R-MI) that increases the cap on HI-B visas for three years and includes an
authorization for additional scholarships. This bill does not, however, require companies to
recruit or retain U.S. workers prior to hiring H-IB visa holders. In the House, late last spring,
the Judiciary Committee approved (23-7) a bill sponsored by Rep. Lamar Smith (R-TX). The
Smith bill also increases the cap for three years but differs sharply from the Abraham bill by
including meaningful protections for U.S. workers. The Smith bill, however, failed to include
any training component for U.S. workers.

        Soon after the House committee vote, House Majority Leader Armey told Rep. Smith that
he would not bring Smith's bill to the House floor unless Rep. Smith worked out a compromise
with Sen. Abraham that pleased the high tech business community. Consequently, in mid-July
Rep. Smith and Sen. Abraham produced a compromise bill (the Abraham/Smith proposal) which
includes weak and limited protections for U.S. workers and a small training provision. In part
due to a senior advisors veto threat, the compromise measure failed to gain sufficient support in
the House prior to the August recess and Republican leaders decided to postpone House floor
consideration until September.

Administration Position

       The Administration has consistently supported sound and balanced legislative efforts to
address shortages of skilled workers within certain sectors of our economy. Our position has
been that the most important way to widen the availability of skilled workers must be to improve
that it may be necessary in the short-term to increase the number of visas for temporary foreign
workers, but that this must only be done in conjunction with additional efforts to increase the
skill level of U.S . workers (funded through a modest H-IB application fee paid by employers)
and meaningful reforms to the H-IB program to protect U.S. workers. These reforms would
require employers to attest to having attempted to recruit U.S. workers before applying for an
H-IB worker and to having not laid off a U.S. worker in order to hire an H-IB worker.

        This position dictated our strong opposition to the bill sponsored by Senator Abraham
because his bill emphasizes providing opportunities for foreign workers rather than providing
opportunities for and protecting U.S. workers. Senator Abraham's bill did not include either a
recruitment or a no lay-off attestation and weakened existing enforcement authority of the
Department of Labor. In contrast, the Administration stated in a letter to Rep. Hyde that it
would support Rep. Lamar Smith's bill, because it included meaningful reforms to the H-IB
program, ifit were modified to include a significant training provision.

        In response to the Abraham/Smith proposal, the Administration made a statement to the
press (on August I) that if the proposal were presented to the President his senior advisors would
recommend that he veto it because the reforms are too weak to adequately protect U.S. workers
(largely because far too many employers would be exempt from the attestations) and the bill, as
structured, would not generate sufficient funds for increased training opportunities for U.S.
workers.

        Soon after th'e release ofthis statement to the press, we put forth a list of proposed
changes (see attached). We made clear that if the proposal were modified consistent with these
suggestions, we would support it. This list includes significant compromises on our part; ~,
(I) we would agree to exempt firms that have a small percentage ofH-IB workers (such as
Microsoft, Intel, and HP) from having to attest to recruiting U.S. workers before hiring an H-IB
worker; and (2) we would agree that the H-lB reforms will sunset with the increase in the cap.
In addition, we have shown flexibility on the exact structure of a provision to protect U.S.
workers from being laid-off and replaced with H-IB workers (although we have insisted that the
provision be meaningful). These compromises have generated some opposition from organized
labor and their Congressional supporters.

       Since releasing our list of proposed changes, we have been engaged in serious discussions
with members of Congress (including Senator Abraham and Representative Lofgren), and
representatives from the business community (such as Jerry Jasinowski ofNAM and Wade
Randlett of Technet) and organized labor (such as the AFL-CIO) in an attempt to reach a
compromise that would include a more substantial training provision and stronger protections for
U.S. workers. We are hopeful that a compromise can be reached before the end ofthe
Congressional session.

Industry's Position

       The business community has generally not opposed the Administration's requirement that

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
the reforms would generate unnecessary and intrusive federal regulations. As a result, the
community supports the Abraham/Smith proposal because it increases the cap on the number of
visas for five years and would exempt a large percentage of companies from the worker
protections.

         In addition, in response to the Administration's opposition to the Abraham/Smith
proposal, some within the business community have accused us of "raising the bar" on what
needs to be included in an acceptable bill and of attempting to block efforts to increase the cap.
In fact, our position has not changed: in order for the President to sign a bill that increases the
cap, it must also contain both a significant training provision and meaningful reform to the H -1 B
program. The Abraham/Smith proposal does not meet that standard.

Organized Labor's Position

         Organized labor does not oppose an increase in the cap, as long as this increase is
accompanied by strong worker protections and a meaningful training provision. Thus, they
opposed the Abraham bill in the Senate and generally supported the Smith bill in the House (if it
were modified to include a training provision). Organized lahor opposes the Abraham/Smith
proposal because the worker protections would only apply to a small number of companies, the
training component is relatively small, and the H-lB reforms would sunset with the increase in
the cap.




                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    August 25,1998


   The Administration has consistently supported sound and balanced legislative efforts to
    address shortages of skilled workers within certain sectors of our economy. Therefore,
    we support attempts to increase the number of H-tB visas as part of a larger package that
    includes both additional training for U.S. workers and meaningful reform of the H-t B
    program that both protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business judgments of
    employers.

   I believe that the most important way to widen the availability of skilled workers must be
    to improve the skills of U.S. workers and ensure that employers seek U.S. workers first.
    While it may be necessary in the short-term to increase the number of visas for temporary
    foreign workers, this must only be done in conjunction with additional efforts to increase
    the skill level of U.S. workers and meaningful reforms to the H-IB program.

   Our goal is to help ensure that qualified U.S. workers have the opportunity to fill a job
    before a temporary foreign worker is hired and that U.S. workers not lose their jobs to
    temporary foreign workers. A substantial training component would help U.S. workers
    obtain the skills needed to fill these jobs and the kinds of reforms that we have advocated
    (like those included in the Smith bill) would effectively target H-lB visas to industries
    experiencing skill shortages.

   Although the agreement reached by the Republicans last month includes a training
    provision and limited protections for U.S. workers, it falls short in several respects. The
    training provision would not generate sufficient funds and the protections included some
    big loopholes that would have made it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.

   We have laid out specific suggestions for ways to improve the Abraham/Smith proposal
    that, if made, would cause us to give this proposal our full support. We have had a series
    of discussions with the bill's sponsors in an attempt to reach an agreement. Our
    suggested changes generally increase the funding for training and strengthen the
    protections for U.S. workers in an attempt to achieve a reasonable, balanced bill that both
    protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business judgments of employers.




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    August 25,1998


Q:   Why has the Administration not embraced the Republican compromise on H-IB
     legislation?

A:   Although the Republican agreement includes a training provision and limited protections
     for U.S. workers, it fell short in several respects. The training provision would not
     generate sufficient funds and the protections included some big loopholes that would
     have made it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.


Q:   Some Republicans and hi-tech executives claim that the Administration keeps
     moving the bar on what it would consider an acceptable bill. What has been going
     on?

A:   Our position on this issue is unchanged: For the President to sign a bill that increases the
     cap on H-IB visas, it must contain both a significant training component and meaningful
     reform to the H-IB program to ensure that American companies do not lay-offU.S.
     workers and replace them with foreign workers.

     The Republican agreement that was unveiled last month fell short in several respects. It
     watered down the training provisions and created some big loopholes that would have
     made it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.

     We have laid out a very specific path to how to get our support on the legislation and
     have had a series of discussions with the bill's sponsors in an attempt to reach an
     agreement. Our suggested changes generally increase the funding for training and
     strengthen the protections for U.S. workers in an attempt to achieve a reasonable,
     balanced bill that both protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business
     judgments of employers.


Q:   Would the President veto the Abraham/Smith compromise?

A:   If the Congress passes the Abraham/Smith proposal in its current form, the President's
     senior advisors will recommend that he veto it. While the President is willing to sign a
     bill that raises the cap on H-IB visas, he also wants to make sure that we protect and
     provide training for U.S. workers. We want to work with the Congress to develop a
     balanced bill that addresses the growing demand for highly skilled workers.




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposed Administration Revisions to H.R. 3736 (the July 29, 1998 version):

1.    Require either a $500 fee for each position for which an application is filed or a $1,000
      fee for each nonimmigrant. Fee to fund training provided under JTPA Title IV. In
      addition, a small portion of these revenues should fund the administration of the H-1 B
      visa program, including the cost of arbitration.

2.    Define H-IB-dependent employers as:

      a.     For employers with fewer than 51 workers, that at least 20% of their workforce is
             H-IB; and

      b.     For employers with more than 50 workers, that at least 10% of their workforce is
             H-IB.

3.    The recruitment and no lay-off attestations apply to: (l) H-lB dependent employers; and
      (2) any employer who, within the previous 5 years, has been found to have willfully
      violated its obligations under this law.

4.    H-lB dependent employers attest they will not place an H-lB worker with another
      employer, under certain employment circumstances, where the other employer has
      displaced or intends to displace a U.S. worker (as defined in paragraph (4)) during the
      period beginning 90 days before and ending 90 days after the date the placement would
      begin.

5.    DOL would have the authority to investigate compliance either: (I) pursuant to a
      complaint by an aggrieved party; or (2) based on other credible evidence indicating
      possible violations.

6.    Establish an arbitration process for disputes involving the laying-off of any U.S. worker
      who was replaced by an H-IB worker, even of a non-H-lB dependent employer. This
      arbitration process would be largely similar to that laid out in H.R. 3736 except that it
      would be administered by the Secretary of Labor. The arbitrator must base his or her
      decision on a "preponderance of the evidence."

7.    Reference in the bill to "administrative remedies" includes the authority to require back
      pay, the hiring of an individual, or reinstatement.

8.    There must be appropriate sanctions for violations of "whistleblower" protections.

9.    Close loopholes in the attestations:

      a.     Strike the provision that "[n]othing in the [recruitment attestation] shall be
             construed to prohibit an employer from using selection standards normal or


                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                         customary to the type of job involved."

                  b.     Clarify that job contractors can be sanctioned for placing an H-lB worker with an
                         employer who subsequently lays off a U.S. worker within the 90 days following
                         placement.

                  c.     Do not exempt H-IB vvorkers with at least a master's degree or the equivalent
                         from calculations of the total number ofR-lB employees.

                  d.     Define lay-off based on termination for "cause or voluntary termination," but
                         exclude cases where there has been an offer of continuing employment.

            10.   Consolidate the LeA approval and petition processes within DOL, rather than within
                  INS.

            11.   Broaden the definition of U.S _ workers to include aliens authorized to be employed by
                  this act or by the Attorney General.

            12.   Include a provision that prohibits unconscionable contracts.

            13.   Include a "no benching" requirement that an H-lB nonimmigrant in "non-productive
                  status" for reasons such as training, lack of license, lack of assigned work, or other such
                  reason (not including when the employee is unavailable for work) be paid for a 40 hour
                  week or a prorated portion of a 40 hour week during such time.

            14.   Increase the annual cap on H-lB visas to 95,000 in FY 1998, 105,000 in FY 1999, and
                  115,000 in FY 2000. After FY 2000, the visa cap shall return to 65,000.

            15.   Eliminate the 7500 cap on the number of non-physician health care workers admitted
                  under the H -1 B program to ITlake the bill consistent with our obligations under the GATS
                  agreement.




                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
1,-   ("


