      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:25-AUG-1998 11:05:16.00

      SUBJECT:   Race and Education

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP   [ WHO]   )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Attached is a draft of a document on race and education that (1)
      incorporates key data related to racial disparaties in education, (2)
      catalogues what the Administration has already done or proposed, and (3)
      suggests some new ideas and next steps.    In doing this, we have divided
      the education world into 3 areas--preschool, K-12, and postsecondary and
      lifelong learing.  Its long--about 20 pages. This document is essentially
      the product of two meetings involving myself, PIR staff (including Chris
      at one meeting), and the few other DPC and NEC staff who happened not to
      be on vacation last week. At this point, the new ideas are probably more
      numerous than "big and bold", though I think it is probably too early in
      the process to discard ideas.

      In some sense, the document is a response to the pressure to get something
      moving. And it is a good starting point for the next round of discussions
      that need to take place once there are more key policy people available
      (e.g., Barbara Chow, Jen Klein, Shireman, CC Rouse, Mike Smith).

      I've sent this draft to Barry White, and asked him to respond to some
      issues in pieces of the draft produced by his staff.  I see the next steps
      here as:

      1. Circulating the document to the key DPC/NEC/OMB/ED policy people (Jen
      Klein, you and Bruce, Shireman and Rouse, Barbara Chow, Mike Smith), and
      asking for responses and additions.

      2. I'm meeting with Chris Edley in a few minutes to review where we are,
      and to solicit his input.  I'll give him a copy of the draft.

      3. Calling a meeting later this week or early next week--depending upon
      when there is a critical mass of people available, to identify a more
      manageable set of issues and new ideas/proposals we want to send to the
      President in the Sept. 10 (or is it 6?) memo.  I think it would be helpful
      if you participate in that meeting.  I will also make sure that Chris and
      relevant PIR staff are invited.


      Any reactions to substance or process would be greatly appreciated.=================
      ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

      TEXT:
      Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D17]MAIL48583563S.226 to ASCII,
       The following is a HEX DUMP:

      FF575043530A0000010A0201000000020500000044370100000200006883876B63D96BA50D156C
      B24C615FF4573700E1930CD3F91A6EB96E99A9E96AE617A14B34308CA84DA126A161BDF4639C20


    Draft
    MCohen
    8/25/98

                                       RACE AND EDUCATION


    INTRODUCTION

             There two fundamental issues pertaining to race and education that must be addressed.
    First, racial and ethnic minorities generally have lower levels of educational attainment -- as
    measured by academic performance as well as high school graduation and postsecondary
    enrollment and graduation -- and correspondingly fewer quality educational opportunities than
    white Americans. This appears to be a function of both race and of poverty, in varying degrees.
    Low income and minority students in particular are less likely to participate in quality preschool
    programs [check], and are more likely to attend schools with large classes, unqualified teachers,
    crumbling facilities, safety and discipline problems, fewer computers, and insufficient time and
    resources to provide students who need it with extra help.

            In the main, the Administration's approach to this issue has been through initiatives and
    proposals to strengthen the quality of public schools overall (with higher standards, strengthened
    accountability, greater choice, smaller classes, modem school buildings, 21 st century technology,
    better prepared teachers, mentors and tutors, after-school programs, etc.) and to target these and
    other resources for extra help and expanded opportunities for students in high poverty
    commumtIes. The Administration has also provided the resources to expand access to
    preschool programs and to higher education. 1

              New proposals to reduce racial and ethnic disparaties in educational attainment and
    opportunities should be consistent with this overall approach, and should significantly extend it
    in strategically selected areas. For example, we should propose significant new Federal
    initiatives as well as challenges to states and local communities designed to significantly improve
    the quality of teachers for low income and minority students. We should also propose new
    inititives, and challenge states and local communities, to take dramatic steps to provide students
    and families in urban communities with a broader range of high quality educational choices.

            Second, to a considerable extent, many students in the United States still attend racially
    identifiable schools, despite the fact that our Nation as a whole has become increasingly diverse.
    At the K-12 level, segregated housing patterns in metropolitan areas make racial segregation
    among schools prevelant. Further, as a result of Prop. 209 in California and the Hopwood

             IThis draft does not yet incorporate the role of civil rights enforcement activities in our
    efforts to reduce disparaties in education performance, or with respect to related issues.
    Subsequent drafts will.


                                                      1            Automated Records Management SY~I~fll
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


    decision in Texas, minority application to and enrollment in selective instutions of higher
    education in those states has declined. If similar laws are enacted elsewhere or if other legal
    challenges erode affirmative action in higher education, we can expect to see a similar pattern on
    a wider scale.

            In the wake of the 1954 Brown decision, school desegregation was seen as an essential
    tool for equalizing education opportunities, in recognition of the Court's finding that separate
    schools could not also be equal. However, the difficulties in eliminating de facto segregation,
    coupled with a growing recognition that school and instructional resources are more important
    determinants of academic performance than the racial composition of the school, have led
    policymakers, parents and educators to focus on making sure that every school is a good school
    regardless of its student body composition, rather than on continued school desegregation.

           The challenge for the Administration is to make the case for the value of diversity in
    schools and colleges, despite the limited evidence that such diversity will enhance educational
    performance as conventionally understood. Rather, we must be able to argue that diversity in
    our schools and colleges will enable all students to be better prepared to participate in more
    diverse communities and workplaces, and in a global economy.

            Further, we must articulate strategies that will achieve diversity. In higher education, our
    discussions to date have focused on partnerships with higher education and business
    communities to take the lead in making the case for diversity, as well as on a range of short and
    long term "pipeline" initiatives (e.g., High Hopes proposal for the long term, and new support for
    AP courses and test preparation programs for high school juniors and seniors in the short run).

            We have not yet focused on promoting the value of diversity and school integration in
    public elementary and secondary schools. I believe it will be important to support this goal, and
    to talk about how it could be achieved. We should make clear that the tools of the past--busing
    in particular--are not the tools of the future. But we can articulate a strategy of sorts of making
    more of our schools more diverse racially and ethnically.

           Our approach should be to first make every school a good school, using strategies
    described above. If we do this in urban areas, parents will have more freedom to choose where
    they will live. This could lead to more desegrated housing patterns, and help keep/attract white
    middle class families to cities.

             We should also work to expand choice in ways that can promote desegration. For
    example, charter schools could accomplish this (but may not always--the Education
    Department's recent charter schools report seems to indicate that some may be lUore racially
    identifiable than the surrounding community). Giving urban high school students the option to
    take courses in community colleges also might (if urban community colleges are more diverse
    than urban public schools [need to check data on this]. Dade County Florida has tried another
    approach, by creating Satellite Leaming Centers. Initially conceived of as a way of coping with


                                                    2               Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
The employer provides the facility, the school system provides the staff, curriculum, textbookds,
etc., and the students are the children of the employees. Since work settings tend to be more
integrated than neighborhoods, this can be a means of creating schools that are integrated along
racial, ethnic and socioeconomic lines. Consequently, encouraging cities and employers to
locate schools on employment sites and letting parents take their kids to school near where they
work rather than where they live could be another approach to promoting greater racial diversity
in schools.


         The pages that follow are designed to stimulate a more full and detailed consideration of
the education ideas the President should advance in the context of his report on the race
initiative. Organized roughly by age-level (pre-school years, elementary and secondary school
years, postsecondary education and lifelong learning) they briefly summarize what we know
about racial disparities, what the Administration has already accomplished and proposed, and
what we additional steps we might take in the future.




                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                HeX-Dump Conversion


                                                 3

In the Pre-School Years: Children who do not reach school prepared to learn, quickly fall
behind their peers, requiring expensive and complex remedial efforts that are not likely ever to
overcome completely the initial learning gaps. Special focus is required for low-income racial
and ethnic minority children who are least likely to attain this level of readiness without special
help to the family and in child care and pre-school settings.

Data:
     Studies show that 89% of all children ages 3-5 are read to three or more times per week
      compared to 74% of black children and 62% of Hispanic children.
     Hispanics are under represented in Head Start; they comprise 29 percent of children in
      poverty, 23% of children in Head Start (excluding Puerto Rico).
     Low-income, minority children are more likely to receive child care in a family day care
      setting (which may be unlicensed and of uncertain quality). Research documents the
      importance of quality child care programs to school readiness. The research shows that
      when children are in better quality child care programs, they have stronger language,
      pre-mathematics, and social skills, better relationships with their teachers and stronger
      self-esteem.

Federal Efforts to Date:

      Head Start: ($4,355 million in FY 1998) will serve 830,000 children in FY98, including
       40,000 infants and toddlers; x% are minorities. Administration goal: serve 1 million
       children by 2002, including doubling the number of infants and toddlers.
      The Child Care and Development Fund ($2,071 million in FY 1998) in subsidies to over
       1 million children. President's FY99 proposal: ($ 7,500 million over 5 years) to serve
       an additional 1 million children by FY 2003.
      Tax credits: $16.5 billion (over five years) for the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit,
       $98 billion provided by the Child Credit, and $150 billion provided by the Earned Income
       Tax Credit.
      Tax credits to private employers that expand or operate child care facilities. President's
       FY99 proposal ($500 million over 5 years). Credits could be targeted to employers in
       Federally-designated empowerment zones.
      Even Start provides educational services to low-income families. In 1998,700 Even
       Start programs provided early childhood education services, adult education, and
       parenting education in integrated "family literacy" programs, serving over 34,000
       families in high-poverty urban and rural areas across the country. Over two-thirds
       of the families served were minorities. Just under half of the programs emphasized
       an ESL as a major part of the curriculum.
      America Reads is a new initiative to help States and communities ensure that all children
       can read well and independently by the end of the third grade. The original proposal

                                                 4
                                                                 Automated Records Management Sy~,,,m
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
      The President's FY99 Child Care Initiative also includes:
               $100 million to assist states in enforcement of state health and safety standards.
               $44 million in scholarships for child care providers who seek training.
               $30 million to fund consumer education, parent hotlines, and research activities.
               $3 billion over five years for an Early Leaming Fund that will provide grants to
               communities for activities that improve early childhood education and the quality
               and safety of child care for children under 5 years old.
               $5.1 billion over five years to offer more help to families with incomes under
               $59,000 through the child and dependent care tax credit.
               $5 million in assistance to states in developing support systems for families of
               children with disabilities.
Business tax credits for child care facilities.

Potential New Strategies:

1. Strengthen Families' Ability to Help the Child in the Home. Improved parenting among
low-income families can significantly improve the perfonnance of children in school and in other
developmental ways. There are a variety of relatively small scale investments in providing such
aid, such as Even Start. Major new investments in parenting and related training could be made
through models that provide home visits by family counselors or nurses teaching basic parenting
skills and outreach (PAFT, HIPPY), or through USDA's WIC program (which reaches 45 percent
of infants born in this country).

2. Make quality pre-school education universally available. Head Start can be a base for this.
Encourage or provide incentives to States to provide all children the opportunity for a beneficial
pre-school experience, with the first goal being meeting the needs ofJow-income children. Title
1 can fund preschool programs, at local discretion. We should consider seting aside a portion of
Title 1 funds for preschool programs, and expanding total Title 1 investment in preschool. We
should also make sure that perfonnance standards required in Head Start reauthorization
adequately address school readiness knowledge and skills.

3. Provide universal access to quality center-based child care for all who want it. Dramatic
increases to the Child Care and Development Fund (which includes State matching) can help
more families receive child care subsidies, thereby assisting low-income families in affording the
child care settings of their choice.

4. Link pre-school programs with public schools. Require explicit ties between publicly-funded
child care and Head Start, and the public schools, in order to ease the transition from pre-school
to elementary school by: requiring updates on the child's developmental status to any problems
from Head Start and child care to the school; agreements between schools and Head Start and
child care centers on curriculum/developmental goals; consultations between schools, and Head
Start and child care centers for children with special needs.


                                                5
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    HeX-Dump Conversion

In the K-12 Years: Success in elementary and secondary schooling is, among other things,
heavily influenced by positive role models, family support and high quality educational services.
Low-income racial and ethnic minority children often lack one or more of these critical success
factors. Without meeting these requirements, many will not succeed in school, the workforce, or
as citizens.

Data:

Race & Poverty

       Poverty rates for minorities remain disproportionately high: In 1996, more than
        one-quarter of both Hispanic and Black families lived in poverty (26.4% and 26.1 %,
        respectively), while the poverty rate for White families was 8.6%. Moreover, this
        percentage increases greatly for minority families with school-age children --
        approximately 33% of Hispanic and 34 of Black families with children under age 18 were
        poor, compared to 13% of comparable White families.

       High minority schools tend to be high poverty schools. 33.1 % of schools with 0-10%
        minority emollment have 0-10% poor emollment. Contrastingly, 87.7% of schools with
        90-100% minority emollments have 50-100% poor emollment. The correlation between
        percent black and Latino enrollment and percent free lunch eligible is .72 (Deepening
        Segregation In American Public Schools: A Special Report From the Harvard Project on
        School Desegregation, pg. 19).

Minority Enrollment

       Betvveen 1975 and 1994, the percentage of White students declined at all school levels,
        while that of Black students grew from 14.5% to 16% and that of Hispanic students grew
        from 6.5% to 13%.

Student Achievement

       In general, data on grade retention and enrollment indicate that Hispanics are less likely
        than their White and black classmates to fall behind in grade level while in the early
        stages oftheir schooling. However, in the latter stages of their academic progress, higher
        percentages of Latinos than Whites are enrolled below their grade level.

       In 1994, the enrollment in gifted and talented programs was 81.4% White, 8.4% Black,
        and 4.7% Hispanic.


                                                 6
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
      and science proficiency. For example, in 1994, the gap between reading test scores for
      Whites and Hispanics was 32 points; the gap between Whites and Blacks was 33 points.

     Black and Hispanic students in 1994 continued to trail their White counterparts by 10 or
      more percentage points in their participation in upper level high school courses such as
      Algebra II, physics, chemistry and trigonometry. In addition, white 12th grade students
      were more likely than Hispanic and black students to take AP exams. In 1996, 133 out
      of every 1000 whites took AP exams while 74 out of every 1000 Hispanics took them.
      32 out of every 1000 blacks took AP exams in that year. Hispanics though, were almost
      three times as likely (35 out of every 1000 students) to take a foreign language AP
      examination as Whites (12 out of every 1000 students). Overall, between 1984 and
      1996, the number of students who took AP exams increased dramatically, rising from 50
      to 131 students per 1000 12th grade students. Whites, Blacks and Hispanics all
      contributed to this significant increase (Condition o/Education 1997, pg. 100).

     By 1996, Blacks had almost closed the high school completion gap with Whites but the
      gap of completion rates for Hispanics remained wide. In 1967, the gap between Whites
      and Blacks was 20 percentage points (approximately 75% to 55%) but by 1996, the gap
      had narrowed to a 7 percentage point difference (approximately 92% to 85%). Hispanics
      lagged far behind at approximately 60% in 1996. That slow progress is in large part
      explained by the increasing representation of Hispanic immigrants with less education
      (Economic Report of the President 1998, Chart 4-7).

     With regard to Internet access, in 1997, schools with 50 percent or more minority
      students enrolled lagged behind schools with 20 percent or few minority students.

Teachers

     Students in high-poverty and high-minority schools are more likely to be taught by
      teachers who do not have a major in the field in which they are teaching.

     There is a strong significant relationship between teacher scores on a basic literacy test
      (TECAT) and student test scores. (Ron Ferguson, 96,97). In Texas, Black and Latino
      children are far more likely to be taught by teachers who scored poorly on the TECA T.
      As the percentage of non-white children in a school increases, the average teacher score
      declines. (John Kain & Kraig Singleton, 96).

     Additionally, while minority students make up nearly a third of our nation's student
      population, only 13% of our teachers are minorities. And more than 40% of our nation's
      public schools do not have a single minority faculty member (A Talented, Dedicated, and
      Well-Prepared Teacher in Every Classroom:     u.s. Department of Education Initiative on
      Teaching).

                                               7
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
      Need to add data


Federal Efforts to Date:
Since 1993, the Administration's strategy to strengthen K-12 education overall and reduce racial
disparaties in achievement has been to:
      Promote high standards for all students.
      Hold schools, school districts and states accountable for results and provide flexibility in
       how to achieve them.
      Target funds to high poverty schools and communities.
      Invest in providing critical learning opportunities, including smaller classes, modem
       buildings, 21st century technology, and after-school tutoring and learning opportunities.
      Expanded choice and charter schools [need to look at data on racial identification in
       charter schools, from latest charter school evaluation.]

These strategies have been incorporated into a number of specific program initiatives, including:

      Goals 2000 and the reauthorized ESEA, both enacted in 1994, re-oriented Federal K -12
       education policy around school-wide and school system reforms, emphasizing
       standards-based reform and the increased use of technology in education.

      Title I -- In 1999 Title I grants to school districts will provide educational services to over
       10 million students in high poverty communities.

      ED Technology --The Administration has proposed a $2 billion federal contribution over
       five years to education technology to ensure that all students are able to use computers
       with high-quality software and have access to the Internet in their classrooms, and that
       teachers have the training to integrate the use of technology into effective instruction.

      School Construction -- The FY 1999 budget proposed Federal tax credits to pay interest
       on nearly $22 billion in bonds to build and renovate public schools.

      Education Opportunity Zones -- a new initiative proposed in the FY 1999 budget to assist
       high-poverty urban and rural local educational agencies to implement education reform
       strategies if they adopt tough reforms to hold schools accountable for improving quality,
       expanding public school choice, ending social promotion, and show real improvements in
       student achievement.

      Class Size -- a new initiative to help States and local school districts recruit, train, and
       hire 100,000 additional well-prepared teachers in order to reduce the average class size to
       18 in grades 1 through 3 in public schools.

                                                 8                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
       several existing programs that assist Hispanic students, such as Bilingual Education,
       Migrant Education, and TRIO.

      Comprehensive school reform demos -- a new program to help nearly 3,500 schools
       nationwide implement effective, research-based school improvement models.

      After School Programs (21 st Century Learning Centers) -- the FY 1 999 budget proposed
       a $160 million to support nearly 3,000 before- and after-school programs that will focus
       primarily on improving student achievement and preventing juvenile violence and
       substance abuse. Because most of the centers will be located within schools, they can
       provide educational services directly linked to students' classroom needs.

      America Reads -- a presidential initiative to ensure that all children are reading well and
       independently by the end of the 3rd grade.

      Teacher Recruitment and Preparation -- new initiative proposed in the HEA -- $67
       million to improve the quality ofteacher education and address shortages of well-trained
       teachers, particularly in urban and rural areas.

Potential New Strategies:

1. Make sure there are qualified teachers in high poverty schools. First, encourage and support
state and local efforts to improve the preparation, certification, recruitment, selection, induction,
retention, evaluation, reward and dismissal of teachers overall. Support necessary R&D on
critical components of an upgraded system, such assessing teacher competence in the classroom.
Second, work to end the practice of disproportionately placing and keeping unqualified teachers
in high poverty schools. Require states to require prospective teacher to pass basic skills/subject
matter tests (and help them develop more demanding assessments) in order to be licensed
Prohibit school districts reseiving Title 1 funds from staffing Title I funded classes (what about
schoolwides???) with unqualified teachers, and bar those without an effective system for teacher
evaluation (including removal of incompetent teachers) from receiving Federal (or just Title 1)
funds. Require K-4 teachers in Title 1 schools to successfully complete training in teaching
reading, and fund the training. Third, help attract and retain the best teachers for high poverty
schools. Fund induction and continuing professional development programs in high poverty
schools. Provide incentives for Board-certified teachers to teach in high poverty schools.

2. Recruit More Minority Teachers. Many believe that a major factor influencing children's
success in education is role models. Enhance current recruitment programs with effective
incentives to attract more minorities to the teaching profession. Minority teachers, administrators,
and school personnel serve as role models for minority students and can provide an important
link between schools and parents.


                                                 9                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
language competency is the key to success in schooling and the economy. ESL and similar
services should be made universally available to all students who need them. Federal funding
can provide matching grants to States to do this.

4. Support English Plus. In addition to ensuring that all LEP students learn English, we should
promote foreign language learning, starting in the early grades, for student's whose native
language is English. The objective is to dramatically increase the number of students who leave
school fluent in two or more languages, regardless of their native language.

5. Report Cards. Pressure can effectively be brought to bear on State, school, and school
district policies to improve educational achievement through public comparisons of achievement.
 Charter and "endow" (no government strings attached) a non-partisan, non-government body do
fair report cards on State, school district, and school achievement.

6. Support demonstrations of. and if effective greatly expand "Newcomer High Schools" for
recently arrived immigrant students. Many school districts are facing an increasing number of
secondary immigrant students vvho have low level English or native language skills, and in many
cases, have had limited fonnal education in their native countries. In order to prevent these
students from dropping out (and these children are a significant factor in the 40% Hispanic
drop-out rate), these students IllUSt learn English, take the required content courses and catch up
to their U.S. peers. Some district have developed Newcomer programs -- either a separate
school or a school-within-a-school. These programs typically educate students for a limited
period of time (most for less than two years) before enrolling them in their home schools. Three
such schools are 4-year high schools. The programs reach beyond the students themselves,
providing classes to orient parents to the U.S. and 63% offer adult ESL classes. There are
currently 75 such programs in 18 States and the Center for Applied Linguistics has sponsored an
evaluation of their effectiveness.

7. Propose an Education Bill of Rights. The proposal would call for states and school districts
to provide every child with essential education services, including (1) high standards, (2)
qualified teachers, (3) curriculum and competent teaching that prepares each student for college
or a good career, (4) parents right to know on an obj ective basis how well their children and are
doing, (5) parental access to teachers and administrators to fix problems that are the fault of
teachers and administrators, (5) preschool programs, (6) small classes, (7) 21 st century
technology, (8) after-school programs, (7) tutoring and other forms of extra help.

8. Expand Choice and Opportunity for students in Urban School Systems. Challenge states
and school districts/cities to espand the ragne of high quality schools students and families can
choose among, thereby enabling students in low performing schools to move to better ones. A
variety of approaches should be encouraged, including:
       Community College Enrollment. High school students should be permitted to enroll in


                                                10
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
       provide inner city students with access to more qualified teachers, because most
       community colleges have faculty with subject matter expertise (whereas urban high
       schools often have teachers teaching out of field). It could also help boost minority
       enrollment in college. [see if this can build on existing tech-prep programs, or other
       articulation agreements.]

      Contract School System. Transform urban school systems from bureaucracies which
       operate large numbers of schools into systems in which the local governing body
       contracts out the operation of each school--to teachers, private operators, etc. In effect
       every school becomes a charter school, with a distinct mission, control over its own
       staffing and budget, and accountable for results. The local school board is responsible
       for selecting the schools, identifYing new types of schools that might be needed and
       soliciting proposals to operate the school, monitoring the performance of each school and
       holding it accountable. Under this approach, all schools would eventually be schools of
       choice.

      Schools located at large employers. Encourage large employers to provide facilities on
       site for schools for children of their own employees, while the school district provides the
       teachers, curriculum, instructional materials, etc. Dade County's Satellite Learning
       Centers provide the model for this approach. Dade's experience shows that these schools
       can (I) be more diverse than other schools, because work sites are more diverse than
       residential neighborhoods (2) save the school districts the cost of new facilities (3) save
       employers costs associated with employee turnover and (4) increase parental involvement
       in the schools.

9. School Safety Initiative
to be develped for 10115 school safety conference




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                11                  Hex-Dump Conversion



   High School Completion: In 1996,4.1 % of White students, 6.7 % of Black students, and
    9.0% of Hispanic students in grades 10-12, aged 15-24 who had been emolled the
    previous October were no longer emolled and had not graduated.

   College emollment: In 1996,45% of Whites, 35.7% of Blacks, and 33.8% of Hispanics
    aged 18-24 who had completed high school were enrolled in college.

          Longitudinal NELS data indicates that even among students who score in the top
           one-third of a standardized test, students from low-income families were five
           times as likely NOT to emoll in college as those from high-income families;
           nearly 60 percent of this group cited financial reasons for their decision.

          In 1993, the average SAT score for Whites was 938 out of 1600, compared to 741
           for Blacks and 802 for Mexican Americans.

          Among high school seniors interested in going to college, those whose parents
           read financial aid materials were much more likely to emoll (80 percent vs. 55
           percent).

          According to NELS data, 71 percent oflow-income students who took geometry
           went to college, compared to 26 percent who did not take geometry.

   College Graduation and Persistence: Of those aged 25-34,41.7% of Asians have a
    bachelor's degree, as do 26% of whites, 12.2% of blacks, 9.8% of Hispanics, and 7.5% of
    Native Americans.

          In 1995-1996,62.9% of black undergraduates received some fonn of financial aid,
           as did 59.4% of Native Americans, 54.2% of Hispanics, 42.9% of Asians, and
           47.9% of Whites. For graduate and professional schools, these numbers were
           62.7% for blacks, 55.8% of Hispanics, 41 % of Asians, and 51.3% of Whites.

          Of those who began their postsecondary education at a 4-year institution in
           1989-90,56.4% of whites received a bachelor's degree within 4 years, as did
           52.8% of AsianlPacific Islanders, 45.2% of1?lacks, 41.3% of Hispanics. Of these
           students, 27% of whites were no longer emolled and had not received a degree, as
           were 36.8% of blacks, 36.6% of Hispanics, and 25.5% of Asians.



                                           12              Automated Records Management Syste'
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
       Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU's), nearly 50% of all Hispanic
       students attend an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI(, and X% of all Native American
       students attend one of the Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCU's).

      Graduate School enrollment: Whites represented 82.6% of those enrolled in graduate
       schools, blacks represented 7.6%, Hispanics 4.4%, AsianlPacific Islanders 4.9%, and
       Native Americans 0.5%.

      Professional School enrollment: Whites represented 76.9% of those enrolled in
       professional schools (e.g., law schools, business schools, etc.), blacks represented 7.4%,
       Hispanics 4.8%, AsianlPacific Islanders 10.2%, and Native Americans 0.7%.

      Adult Literacy: According to the 1992 National Adult Literacy Survey (NALS), there
       are about twice as many racial minorities (across all groups) and immigrants in the lowest
       tier of literacy as there are in the overall population. These adults can barely, if at all,
       perform basic tasks such as totaling an entry on a deposit slip, locating the time or place
       of a meeting on a form, and identifying a piece of information in a news article. As a
       result, they are more likely to be unemployed, work fewer hours, and earn less. They are
       also more likely to live in poverty and receive public assistance, and less likely to vote.

             Black, Hispanic, and American Indian!Alaska Native adults lag behind Whites in
              average educational attainment. In particular, Hispanics adults have the lowest
              average educational attainment at about 10 years, and a disturbingly large share of
              low-literate Hispanic adults failed to correctly perform even one task in the
              NALS.

      Participation in Adult Education: Racial Illinorities comprise a disproportionate share of
       clients served by adult education programs. In 1996, 38 percent of adult education
       participants were Hispanic, 32 percent White, 17 percent Black, and 12 percent Asian or
       Pacific Islander.

             English as a second language CESL) clients are the largest and fastest growing part
              of the adult education population. They receive substantially more hours of
              instruction and remain in programs longer than adult basic education (ABE) and
              adult secondary education CASE) clients. Strong demand has created long waiting
              lists for ESL programs throughout the country, while ABE and ASE programs
              appear to have excess capacity.


Federal Efforts to Date: The funding levels below are the FY99 Budget requested levels, unless
otherwise noted.



                                               13               Automated Records Management System
                                                                HeX-Dump Conversion
      High Hopes for College: $140 million in federal funds ($2.2 billion over 5 years). The
      program aims to reach 3,000 middle schools & serve over 1 million students over 5 years.
      Isn't this the same as the college-school partnership item below? Why do the
      per-student costs for this description come out to $2200 per kid, while the description
       below is $800 per kid?

      College-School Partnership: $140 million to provide early intervention services to
       approximately 175,000 high-poverty middle school students.

      TRIO Programs: $243 million for Upward Bound (inc!. Math/Science initiative) to
       increase enrollment in postsecondary education for approximately 60,000 disadvantaged
       students, and $96 million for Talent Search to provide academic support to about 330,000
       middle and high school youth.

      Hispanic Dropout Initiative: More than $600 million dollars for a comprehensive action
       plan, including $30 million to transform schools with high drop out rates, and increased
       funds for Hispanic-serving institutions as well as federal TRIO programs.

      School-to-Work (STW): $250 million in federal funds. Over one million students
       participate. More than half of all partnership secondary schools, as well as 40 percent of
       postsecondary partners, have developed agreements that grant college credit or advanced
       standing for secondary school course work or dual enrollment.

      Summer Jobs: $871 million a year to provide work experience in public and private
       agencies, enhance basic educational skills, encourage school completion, and expose
       530,000 low-income youth to the world of work.

      Early Awareness Information: $15 million in federal funds to publicize availability of
       financial aid and to encourage students and their families to prepare for higher education.

      Financial Aid: As the data above shows, minority students are heavily dependant on
       financial aid. The FY 1999 Budget provides a total of $57 billion in aid, including $39
       billion from FFEL and Direct Loans (9.3 million awards) $10.5 billion from the SFA
       accounts (8.8 million awards), and $7 billion in HOPE and Lifetime Learning tax credits.


             Work Study: $900 million in federal funds ($1.1 billion with employer match).
              Over one million participants at 3,400 institutions.

             Pell Grants: $7.5 billion available to 4 million students. $3,100 maximum award,
              a 35% increase since FY 1994.


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                               14
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

             Supp\. Educational Opportunity Grants (SEOG): $619 million in federal funds
              ($784 million with match). About 1.05 million students receive aid at about
              3,800 institutions.

             FFELlDirect Loans: Income contingent and graduated repayment options are
              available. In addition, the HEA reauthorization bill should lower the interest
              rates on new FFEL and direct loans by 0.8%.

Minority Serving Institutions

      HBCU's: $137.5 million to strengthen HBCU's; $96 million for capital financing;
       Executive Order on HBCU's (i.e., Executive Agency Actions to Assist HBCU's).

      $28 million to strengthen HSI's, and $5 million to strengthen TCU's.


      National Need Graduate Fellowships (Consolidation ofGAANN, Javits, etc.): $37.5
       million for X,XXX participants.

Adults, Dropouts and Others Outside the Education Mainstream

      Adult Education State Grants support local programs that provide ABE, ASE/GED
       preparation, and ESL services to adults and drop-outs with limited literacy skills. 1998
       appropriation: $345 million. 1999 request: $361 million. Participants served: 4
       million adults.

      The Even Start Family Literacy Program supports local school-community
       partnerships that provide an integrated, intergenerational program of adult education,
       early childhood education, and parenting education to low-income, educationally
       disadvantaged families. 1998 appropriation: $124 million. 1999 request: $115 million.
       Participants served: 31,500 families (36,400 adults).

      The High School Equivalency Program provides academic and support services to
       migratory and seasonal farmworkers (or children of such workers), who are 16 years of age or
       older and not currently enrolled in school, to obtain the equivalent of a high schobdiploma
       and subsequently to gain employment or begin postsecondary education or training1998
       appropriation: $7.6 million. 1999 request: $10 million. Participants served: 3,000
       students.

      Youth Opportunity Areas (proposed) would provide grants to support mUltiple
       education, job training, and social services for youth in EZ/EC and similar high poverty

                                               15
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
       target communities from current levels ofless than 50 percent to a level of 80 percent, or
       commensurate with the employment rate in non-poverty areas. Participants to be
       served: 50,000 youth.

      Welfare to Work and TANF. Resources to encourage and help welfare recipients to
       obtain needed education and good jobs.

      Workforce Investment Act. The reauthorized JTPA adult and youth programs.

      One-Stop Career Centers: $147 million for implementation of One-Stop Career
       Centers and continued development of America's Labor Market Information System.
       These will provide streamlined access to job referrals, job search assistance, information
       onjobs and their skill requirements, and information on training opportunities. To date,
       all States have received implementation grants, and XX centers have been created across
       YY states.


Potential New Strategies:

High School Completion and Postsecondary Enrollment

I. Sustain and institutionalize the principles of the President's School to Work initiative as that
law sunsets. The Workforce Investment Act enacted on August 7,1998 establishes new Youth
Councils that will develop the portions of the local plan relating to youth policy. With a
re-constituted membership that includes local school representatives, these councils offer the
based on which to build a more permanent local structure for coordination and cooperation of
social services, business and schools that School to Work began. This is critical to the
development, learning, and success of minority youth. What is the action step here? Who
does what?

2. Aggressively expand early mentoring and information. The High Hopes for College initiative
provides a model for all schools to provide families with early information about the cost of
going to college, financial aid that is available, what courses to take (esp. math, science) to be
well-prepared for college, and the mentoring many need. Backed by partnerships with area
colleges, counselors would work with students in middle school to help raise expectations and
goals early on. The current initiative is very small. It could be greatly expanded. I don't think
this is really a new proposal, unless we can really afford to ramp up High Hopes beyond its
current trajectory-and unless the program can handle a faster growth rate. Can we, and can
it?

3. Federal Matching Funds for AP courses and for AP and SAT/ACT Preparation. The
President has made universal access to two years of higher education a priority, and has created


                                                16
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
to make all students more competitive by closing the gaps in advanced course availability as well
as SAT and ACT test scores. The Federal government could establish funding matching
mechanisms to encourage states to improve access to AP courses and preparation for AP tests in
low-income schools; in areas where AP courses are not available, funds could be used for
partnerships with community colleges that offer similar courses. Similarly, matched funds could
be used to do one of a number of things for SAT/ACT preparation: pay for low-income youth to
attend prep courses (e.g., Kaplan; Princeton Review); fund poor school districts to set up their
own test prep programs; as in America Reads, waive the federal match for Work Study students
who help prepare disadvantaged students for the tests.

4. Encourage states to give scholarships to top of graduating class. States can create incentives
by rewarding the top 5 or 10% of graduating seniors at every school with free tuition to any
public institution in the state. This approach is currently being tried out in Texas. Federal
matching funds could accelerate adoption in other States.

5. Aggressively Promote knowledge and use of the President's Income Contingent Repayment
option: Many believe that low income, and especially minorities, will not take the risk of default
seemingly inherent in borrowing money for college, and thus will not attend. The President's
ICR repayment option eliminates the risk of borrowing for higher education. If a borrower fails
to earn enough after schooling to repay the loans through nonnal repayment plans, ICL reduces
payments only to what is affordable, and if not paid off in 25 years, converts the loan to a grant --
no further repayments required.

6. Frontload Pell grants: Under a frontloading scheme, rather than receiving a 4-year stream of
federal grant awards, students would receive the same amount of grant aid but within the first
two school years, and finance the remainder of their education entirely through loans.
Frontloading has been shown to increase both the postsecondary enrollment and retention rates of
disadvantaged students, with low income blacks and Hispanics realizing the largest gains.

7. Strengthen Civil Rights Enforcement and Laws: Civil rights enforcement could be
strengthened by integrating investigation, litigation, and remediation approaches across Federal
and state agencies, and increasing funding for civil rights enforcement. In addition, civil rights
laws could be strengthened by forbidding institutions of higher education that are found guilty of
discrimination from receiving Federal grants and/or student aid until the problem is remediated.
Another option is to suspend guilty institution's tax exempt status.

8. Provide strong incentives for Higher Education Institutions to Establish Retention and
Preparation Programs: While TRIO's current structure is not be conducive to a large expansion,
it has developed useful models for helping minorities prepare for, enter, and stay in higher
education. The federal goverrunent could encourage institutions to establish the next-generation
of TRIO-like programs for all students who need them. Higher education institutions could be
required set up programs modeled on successful aspects of TRIO as a condition of continued


                                                  17
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

9. Encourage Institutions to Provide Scholarships to Local Disadvantaged Students: In an attempt
to give back to their respective communities, many institutions of higher education (e.g.,
Harvard) provide undergraduate scholarships to local disadvantaged students. Again, the federal
role in this strategy could include financial incentives, or it could be limited to challenging
institutions to establish or expand these scholarships.

Minority Serving Institutions

1. Encourage Partnerships Between Minority Serving Institutions and other Institutions: As the
data above shows, a large percentage of Blacks, Hispanics, and Native Americans attend
HBCU's, HSI's, and TCU's, respectively. One way to help these students is to establish
"partnerships" between minority serving institutions and other institutions of higher education
(there is currently such a partnership between some HBCU's, Georgia Tech, Boston University,
and Rochester Institute of Technology). These partnerships could, for instance, allow students
at minority serving institutions to take courses at partner institutions, transfer to partner
institutions without paying more in tuition, and use labs or other facilities at partner institutions.

The federal role in this strategy could be to provide financial incentives for schools to establish
these partnerships (e.g., more student financial assistance funds). Or, the federal role could be
limited to challenging schools to create these partnerships, similar to how the President called for
institutions to put Work Study students to work as reading tutors as part of his America Reads
Challenge.

Drop-outs, Adults, and Others Outside the Educational Mainstream

1. Concentrate multiple resources in lowest income areas for maximum impact. Combine the
concepts ofEZ/ECs, Youth Opportunity Areas, Education Opportunity Zones, with current
investments in TANF, JTPA, and Title I-Education for the Disadvantaged (and other relevant
resources, including housing and criminal justice) into a massive effort to improve the quality of
education, training, and economic development, to lead to dramatic reductions in unemployment
and in employment rates of low income, minority youth and adults in the locations where their
problems are most intractable.

2. Universal ESL for every adult who needs it. Every adult who wants to learn English should
be given the chance to do so. Create and fund a separate authority for ESL programs to
accommodate rapid growth and unmet demand without diminishing other Adult Education
purposes. Encourage life skills training for recent immigrants. Promote parent involvement,
continuing education, and civic participation.

3. Redesign the GED to make it an effective alternative to a high school degree. The current
GED is not valued as a real equivalent to a high school degree, but some such device is necessary


                                                  18
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
subsidize develop of an effective GED that is aligned with challenging State content and
perfonnance standards for high school graduates, instead of norrning them against a national
average of high school graduates. Do we want a new GED--or do we want states to provide
alternative routes, and alternative ways, for adults to demonstrate that they have met the
performance standards for a high school diploma?

4. Newcomer High School. See "In the K-12 Years" for more infonnation.




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                              19


