RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]        )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 17:33:18.00

SUBJECT:   Resend w/out computer gibberish --comments back asap

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis    ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]               )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]             )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sara M. Latham ( CN=Sara M. Latham/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]           )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]             )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Revised Draft 8/25/98 6:00pm
Jordan Tamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR SCHOOL SAFETY EVENT
MECHANICS HALL
WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS
August 26, 1998

        Acknowledgments: Mayor Raymond Mariano; Sen. Kennedy; Rep. McGovern;
State Attorney General Scott Harshbarger; Chief of Police Edward Gardella;
Kathleen Bisson [Burncoat Middle School teacher]; Baltimore Police Officer
and Police Corps graduate Michael Jones.

        It is an honor to be here today in the city of Worcester [wooster], O&the
heartbeat of America08 ... an honor to speak in this great hall where so
many great Americans have spoken, from Frederick Douglas, to Susan B.
Anthony, to Henry David Thoreau ... and an honor to be the first President
to visit Worcester [wooster] for more than 30 years.  I am also honored to
share this stage with Kathleen Bisson and Officer Michael Jones, and to
hear about what they are doing to make their communities stronger and
safer.

        Before I begin my remarks, I would like to say a few words about
the massive hurricane that is battering the mid-Atlantic coast, especially
in North Carolina, even as we speak.  Since Hurricane Bonnie first made
landfall yesterday afternoon, it has torn houses and lives apart, with


devastating wind, rain, and tidal surges of up to 11 feet.  Many of the
communities affected by this storm had only just rebuilt homes and
businesses destroyed by Hurricane Fran last year. Worst of all, we know
that another powerful storm -- Hurricane Danielle -- is moving quickly in
the wake of Hurricane Bonnie, threatening to strike.

        Hillary and I join with all Americans in sending our thoughts and
prayers to the families and communities struggling to survive this
terrible storm.  I spoke yesterday afternoon to FEMA Director James Lee
Witt, and asked him to travel to North Carolina and report back to me.
FEMA is already working alongside state and local emergency agencies to
assess the damage, and to bring aid and comfort where it is needed.
Hundreds of people and reserves of equipment and resources have already
been deployed, and stand at the ready to bring relief as soon as the
hurricane is over.' I promise you, we will be there every step of the way,
for as long as it takes, to help communities and families overcome this
ordeal.

        Now, ID,d like to talk to you about what has brought all of us
here today -- and what Vice President and Mrs. Gore, and Secretary Riley,
are in California to talk about: our common commitment to make our streets
and our schools safe for our families and our children, and two important
steps we are taking to meet that challenge.

        When I was running for President in 1992, I was at a rally in a
hotel in New York City. As I was walking through the kitchen, a hotel
employee came up to me.  He told me that he was an immigrant, working hard
here to make a better life for his family.  He said, D&in the country I
come from, we were poor, but we were free.  Here, I have more money, but
we're not free.DS He told me that because of violent crime, his young son
couldnD,t play in the park right across the street from their home; he
couldnD,t walk two blocks to school without fear of being attacked or shot
by a stray bullet.  So, his father said to me, D&if I vote for you, I want
you to make my boy free.DS

         I have never forgotten his words. And since I first took office,
I have tried to live up to them -- to make his boy, and all children,
free.  Free from the fear of violence, free to play in parks and go to
school in safety, free to live up to their God-given potential, everyone
of them.

        For five years now, I have been committed to working together with
far-sighted leaders at the state and local level to protect our children
and make our communities safe.  Together, we have put in place a bold new
strategy, grounded in the principles and practices law enforcement
officers and communities told us were working: community policing;
anti-gang initiatives; targeted deterrence; tougher penalties; smarter,
more comprehensive prevention.

        I am proud to say that this comprehensive strategy has begun to
show remarkable results.  Crime rates are at 25-year low, juvenile crime
has begun to decrease, and all across America, families are beginning to
feel safe again -- free again -- in their homes and on their streets.

        But you and I know that when it comes to keeping our communities
and families safe, we cannot afford to rest -- and each of us must do our
part. This morning, we have heard some remarkable stories from people who
are rising to that responsibility. I want to talk to you now about two
steps we are taking to build on their efforts and to continue our
progress: first, making our schools safer by releasing an early warning


guide for school violence prevention, and second, improving the quality of
policing by expanding the remarkable Police Corps program we heard about a
few moments ago from Senator Kennedy and Officer Jones.

       Early Warning Guide

        For more than five years, I have been committed to making our
schools places of learning, not places of fear.  School security is
tighter; anti-gang prevention is better; penalties are stronger. We have
worked to strengthen and expand the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program ...
to enforce zero tolerance for guns in schools ... to encourage communities
to crack down on truancy ... to support those who wish to adopt school
uniform policies ... to insist on discipline and respect for authority in
our schools ... and to expand afterschool programs that keep our children
in the classroom, not on the streets.

        This year, a new report showed that the overwhelming majority of
AmericaD,s schools are safe.  Later this year, we will hold the first-ever
White House Conference on School Safety to continue our progress.  But
when children in inner city schools must walk through metal detectors to
protect them from the threat of violence, when students worry more about
guns and gangs than math and science, when high schools in small towns
like Springfield, Oregon and Jonesboro, Arkansas are torn apart by
disturbed teenagers armed with deadly weapons, we know we must do more.

        Earlier this year, in the aftermath of the tragedy in Springfield,
I directed Secretary Riley and Attorney General Reno to develop a safe
schools guide to help educators and parents recognize and respond to the
early warning signs of violence. Today, I am pleased to announce that the
guide is ready -- and over the next few weeks, every school in America
will receive a copy, just in time for the start of the new school year.

        This guide lists early warning signs to look for in troubled young
people, and instructs schools on how to develop violence prevention and
response plans.  It will give us an important tool to stop violence before
it starts -- but it also requires something of us: it requires attention,
it requires involvement, and it requires commitment.  Most of all, it
requires a community-wide effort.

        Because we know that we will only meet the challenge of making our
schools and our communities safe when we come together -- sharing
resources, listening to one another, and learning from one another.

       Police Corps:

        The Police Corps program we heard about earlier embodies these
same principles.  I  first heard about the Police Corps nearly ten years
ago, when I was Governor of Arkansas.  I was so impressed by this program
-- and by the force of Adam WalinskyD,s commitment to it -- that I became
a charter member of the National Committee for the Police Corps on the
spot. And I was proud to sign into law state legislation to create a
Police Corps scholarship program in Arkansas.

        What impressed me about the Police Corps was the way it embodies
the vision of President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, who understood that
citizenship meant giving something back to the community, and that law
enforcement meant more than policing a community, it meant being part of
it.

       When I became President, I was determined to help carry this


vision forward. Thanks to the efforts of Adam Walinsky, of Senator Ted
Kennedy, and of Lieutenant Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, we are
doing exactly that.  As we have already heard, much in the way of the
ROTC,  the Police Corps program gives talented young people substantial
college scholarships in return for their service as police officers in our
communities.

        In 17 states around the country, this remarkable program is
already helping to create a new generation of police officers -- young
men and women, trained to stand on the front lines and to listen on front
porches ... to work with young people in need and in distressed
communities ... and to take their place alongside our nationO,s dedicated
police officers.

         As you know, we are joined here today by several young members of
the Police Corps.   These young people embody everything we hope for in our
law enforcement officers: honor, courage, commitment to community and
country.

        We need more police officers like these fine young men and women.
That is why today, I am pleased to announce $30 million in funding to help
more states award college scholarships in return for a commitment of law
enforcement service.

        Bobby Kennedy once said, O&the fight against crime is, in the last
analysis ... a fight to preserve that quality of community which is at the
root of our greatness; a fight to preserve confidence in ourselves and our
fellow citizens; a battle for the quality of our lives.OB

         With these actions, we are moving one step closer to winning that
battle for all Americans, and to building a stronger America for the 21st
Century.


