RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 13:25:34.00

SUBJECT:   daily report--education

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Single Sex schools.  Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchinson has asked for the
Education DepartmentO,s views on an amendment she will try to attach to
the Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill regarding single sex
education.  The amendment would permit school districts to use ESEA Title
VI (an education block grant) funds for the purpose of establishing single
sex schools, by "clarifying" that title IX does not prohibit the use of
these funds for single sex schools or classes, as long as comparable
opportunities are provided to students of both genders.   Our position is
that while we support the goal of permitting single sex schools and
classrooms, this amendment is both unnecessary and unwise. It is
unnecessary because Title IX currently allows for comparable single-sex
schools, and the Education Department is preparing modifications to its
Title IX regulations that will also permit comparable single-sex
classrooms.  Further, the amendment would do nothing to address the most
contentious issue in this area, which is whether O&comparable08
opportunities must always include single sex schools for each gender, or
could instead include comparable educational opportunities offered in coed
settings. While this issue could be resolved legislatively, by amending
Title IX, we believe it is best handled through revised ED regulations.
In addition, we believe the amendment is unwise because as drafted would
create an anomaly in which local schools could use Title VI funds when
establishing single sex programs--but would suggest that other federal, s
tate or local funds could not be used for these purposes.   This would
create significant new administrative burdens on local school systems,
EDO,s OCR, and courts, to trace Title VI funds in order to determine
whether schools are in compliance with the law.

Quite apart from the merits of this bill, Sen. Specter intends to oppose
any riders to the appropriations bill, as part of his strategy to produce
a final appropriations bill that you can sign.


Education Event. We are working with NEC to plan a back-to-school event
for Monday August 31, prior to your departure for Russia, in which you can
highlight your education agenda and challenge the returning Congress to
enact it before it adjourns.   You will call on Congress to enact
legislation to modernize schools, reduce class size, expand charter
schools, and promote early literacy, as well as to reauthorize the Higher
Education Act which includes your teacher preparation and recruitment
initiative and you High Hopes mentoring initiative.   You will also use
this as an occasion to reiterate your education and training priorities
for the Labor-HHS-Education appropriations bill. The event will most
likely take place at a suburban Maryland elementary school.


