RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 17:58:04.00

SUBJECT:   H-1B memo for VP

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP   [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's a copy of the version of the memo that I sent to the VP's office.

-- Ceci


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D62]MAIL45016873W.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA040000010A02010000000205000000F954000000020000A98C384DE2E78B4C9033DA
597F775954497D26E2F6651A925A75449DB7EOF6295CAE544C92741F6C1DB2C1505EOD03CCD376
632BFD67F1B02D21BF4ACAF44777E19C5B09118156E5A846A6EDODC872773895FF3FE6BEIBC197

DRAFT MEMORANDUM FOR THE VICE-PRESIDENT

FROM:         GENE SPERLING                                          Automated Records Management System
              BRUCE REED
              CECILIA ROUSE                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

SUBJECT:       STATUS OF H-IB LEGISLATION

Background

         H-IB visas are temporary work visas that allow "highly skilled" immigrants (with a BA
or equivalent) to work in this country for up to six years. Under current law, the number of
H-IB visas is capped at 65,000 per year. During the last fiscal year, this cap was reached for the
first time. This fiscal year the cap was reached in early May; as a result, no more visas can be
issued until October I. The information technology (IT) industry strongly supports raising the
annual cap to address what it maintains is a shortage of U.S. workers with IT skills. Others,
including the Department of Labor and organized labor, challenge the industry's conclusions
about a shortage and are concerned that the current H-I B program does not target its use to
employers who are experiencing skills shortages.

        Until last month there were two legislative vehicles for increasing the cap on the number
ofH-lB visas. On May 18, the Senate passed (78-20) an industry-backed bill sponsored by
Senator Abraham (R-MI) that increases the cap on HI-B visas for three years and includes an
authorization for additional scholarships. This bill does not, however, require companies to
recruit or retain U.S. workers prior to hiring H-IB visa holders. In the House, late last spring,
the Judiciary Committee approved (23-7) a bill sponsored by Representative Lamar Smith
(R-TX). The Smith bill also increases the cap for three years but differs sharply from the
Abraham bill by including meaningful protections for U.S. workers. The Smith bill, however,
failed to include any training component for U.S. workers.

        Soon after the House committee vote, House Majority Leader Armey told Rep. Smith that
he would not bring Smith's bill to the House floor unless Rep. Smith worked out a compromise
with Sen. Abraham that pleased the high tech business community. Consequently, in mid-July
Rep. Smith and Sen. Abraham produced a compromise bill (the Abraham/Smith proposal) which
includes weak and limited protections for U.S. workers and a small training provision. In part
due to a senior advisors veto threat, the compromise measure failed to gain sufficient support in
the House prior to the August recess and Republican leaders decided to postpone House floor
consideration until September.

Administration Position

      We agree that it may be necessary in the short-term to increase the number of visas for
temporary foreign workers, but this must only be done in conjunction with additional efforts to
employers) and meaningful reforms to the H-IB program to protect U.S. workers. This is
because it has been a core Clinton/Gore priority that the most important way to widen the
availability of skilled workers must be to improve the skills of U.S. workers. We are also
committed to ensuring that employers seek U.S. workers first. The reforms to the H-IB
program that we have advocated would help target usage of the H-IB program to employers
facing genuine skills shortages by requiring employers to attest to having attempted to recruit
U.S. workers before applying for an H-IB worker and to having not laid off a U.S. worker in
order to hire an H-lB worker.

        Despite our efforts to work with members of the business community and Congress to
craft a bill consistent with our principles, and in the face of our strong opposition, the Senate
passed the bill sponsored by Senator Abraham that did not include either a recruitment or a no
lay-off attestation and that weakened existing enforcement authority of the Department of Labor.
 In contrast, the Administration stated in a letter to Rep. Hyde that it would support Rep. Lamar
Smith's bill, because it included meaningful reforms to the H-IB program, ifit were modified to
include a significant training provision.

         While we met with both Sen. Abraham and Rep. Smith independently on several
occasions early this summer, they finalized their compromise proposal without incorporating
most of our suggestions. The Abraham/Smith proposal is better than the Abraham bill because
it includes a small application fee to fund training and requires firms that have a high percentage
ofH-IB workers (typically "job shops" that contract workers to other firms) to attest to having
attempted to recruit U.S. workers before hiring an H-IB worker and to having not laid off a U.S.
worker in order to hire an H-IB worker. Unfortunately, the reforms are too weak to adequately
protect U.S. workers (largely because far too many employers would be exempt from both
attestations) and the bill, as structured, would not generate sufficient funds for increased training
opportunities for U.S. workers.

        We received a copy ofthe final Abraham/Smith proposal less than 24 hours prior to when
we were told it was to be introduced on the House floor. Given the problems with the proposal
and the lack of opportunity to negotiate further, we made a statement to the press that if the
proposal were presented to the President his senior advisors would recommend that he veto it.
In an effort to show our willingness to continue to work to improve the bill, that same day we put
forth a list of proposed changes (see attached) and made clear that if the proposal were modified
consistent with these changes, we would support it. This list included significant compromises
on our part: ~,(1) we would agree to apply the recruitment attestation only to firms that have
a high percentage ofH-IB workers (this would exempt companies such as Microsoft, Intel, and
HP from this attestation); and (2) we would agree that the H-I B reforms sunset with the increase
in the cap. These compromises have generated some opposition from organized labor and their
Congressional supporters.

        Since releasing our list of proposed changes, we have been engaged in serious discussions
with members of Congress (including Sen. Abraham and Rep. Lofgren), and representatives from
the business community (such as Jerry Jasinowski ofNAM and Wade Randlett of Technet) and

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
more substantial training provision and stronger protections for U.S. workers. In these
discussions, we have shown flexibility on the exact structure of a provision to protect u.S.
workers from being laid-off and replaced with H-lB workers, but we continue to push for a
meaningful provision that would protect all U.S. workers. We are hopeful that a compromise
can be reached before the end of the Congressional session.

Industry's Position

        The business community has generally not opposed the Administration's requirement that
any H-IB legislation must include a significant training provision. It has, however, argued that
the reforms would generate unnecessary and intrusive federal regulations. As a result, the
community supports the Abraham/Smith proposal because it increases the cap on the number of
visas for five years and would exempt a large percentage of companies from the worker
protections.

        In addition, while some within the business community described our list of changes to
the Abraham/Smith proposal as "good faith and reasonable," others accused us of "raising the
bar" on what needs to be included in an acceptable bill and of attempting to block efforts to
increase the cap. In fact, our position has not changed: in order for the President to sign a bill
that increases the cap, it must also contain both a significant training provision and meaningful
reform to the H-IB program. The Abraham/Smith proposal does not meet that standard.

Organized Labor's Position

        Organized labor does not oppose an increase in the cap, as long as this increase is
accompanied by strong worker protections and a meaningful training provision. Thus, it
opposes the Abraham bill in the Senate and generally supports the Smith bill in the House (if it
were modified to include a training provision). Organized labor opposes the Abraham/Smith
proposal because the worker protections would only apply to a small number of companies, the
training component is relatively small, and the H-IB reforms would sunset with the increase in
the cap. Not surprisingly, its main concerns with our list of changes to the Abraham/Smith
proposal are that (I) we would agree to apply the recruitment attestation only to firms that have a
high percentage ofH-IB workers (the concern is that this would exempt an unknown, and
potentially large, number of firms from this worker protection); and (2) we would agree that the
H-IB reforms sunset with the increase in the cap.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    August 26,1998


   We support attempts to increase the number ofH-lB visas as part of a larger package that
    includes both additional training for U.S. workers and meaningful reform of the H-IB
    program that both protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business judgments of
    employers.

   We want to pass a bill to increase the cap. At the same time, our goal is to help ensure
    that qualified U.S. workers have the opportunity to fill a job before a temporary foreign
    worker is hired and that U.S. workers not lose their jobs to temporary foreign workers.
    A substantial training component would help U.S. workers obtain the skills needed to fill
    these jobs and the kinds of reforms that we have advocated (like those included in the
    Smith bill) would effectively target H-IB visas to industries experiencing skill shortages.

   We agree that the reforms should be targeted at companies that are dependent on H-IB
    workers (primarily the 'job shops"), but we also believe that all U.S. workers should have
    some additional level of protection against being laid-off so that the employer can hire an
    H-IB worker. We believe that these reforms should not be overly intrusive for
    employers.

   Although the agreement reached by the Republicans last month includes a training
    provision and limited protections for U.S. workers, it falls short in several respects. The
    training provision would not generate sufficient funds and the protections included some
    big loopholes that would make it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.

   We have laid out specific suggestions for ways to improve the Abraham/Smith proposal
    that, if made, would cause us to give this proposal our full support. We have had a series
    of discussions with the bill's sponsors in an attempt to reach an agreement. Our
    suggested changes generally increase the funding for training and strengthen the
    protections for U.S. workers in an attempt to achieve a reasonable, balanced bill that both
    protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business judgments of employers.




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
                                   August 26,1998


Q:   Why has the Administration not embraced the Republican compromise on H-1B
     legislation?

A:   Although the Republican agreement includes a training provision and limited protections
     for U.S. workers, it fell short in several respects. The training provision would not
     generate sufficient funds and the protections included some big loopholes that would
     have made it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.


Q:   Some Republicans and hi-tech executives claim that the Administration keeps
     moving the bar on what it would consider an acceptable bill. What has been going
     on?

A:   Our position on this issue is unchanged: For the President to sign a bill that increases the
     cap on H-IB visas, it must contain both a significant training component and meaningful
     reform to the H-IB program to ensure that American companies do not lay-off U.S.
     workers and replace them with foreign workers.

     The Republican agreement that was unveiled last month fell short in several respects. It
     watered down the training provisions and created some big loopholes that would have
     made it difficult to tackle abuses in the program.

     We have laid out a very specific path to how to get our support on the legislation and
     have had a series of discussions with the bill's sponsors in an attempt to reach an
     agreement. Our suggested changes generally increase the funding for training and
     strengthen the protections for U.S. workers in an attempt to achieve a reasonable,
     balanced bill that both protects U.S. workers and respects the good faith business
     judgments of employers.


Q:   Would the President veto the Abraham/Smith compromise?

A:   If the Congress passes the Abraham/Smith proposal in its current form, the President's
     senior advisors will recommend that he veto it. While the President is willing to sign a
     bill that raises the cap on H-IB visas, he also wants to make sure that we protect and
     provide training for U.S. workers. We want to work with the Congress to develop a
     balanced bill that addresses the growing demand for highly skilled workers.



                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposed Administration Revisions to H.R. 3736 (the July 29, 1998 version):

1.    Require either a $500 fee for each position for which an application is filed or a $1,000
      fee for each nonimmigrant. Fee to fund training provided under JTPA Title IV. In
      addition, a small portion of these revenues should fund the administration of the H -1 B
      visa program, including the cost of arbitration.

2.    Define H-IB-dependent employers as:

      a.     For employers with fewer than 51 workers, that at least 20% of their workforce is
             H-IB; and

      b.     For employers with more than 50 workers, that at least 10% of their workforce is
             H-IB.

3.    The recruitment and no lay-off attestations apply to: (I) H-IB dependent employers; and
      (2) any employer who, within the previous 5 years, has been found to have willfully
      violated its obligations under this law.

4.    H-IB dependent employers attest they will not place an H-IB worker with another
      employer, under certain employment circumstances, where the other employer has
      displaced or intends to displace a U.S. worker (as defined in paragraph (4)) during the
      period beginning 90 days before and ending 90 days after the date the placement would
      begin.

5.    DOL would have the authority to investigate compliance either: (1) pursuant to a
      complaint by an aggrieved party; or (2) based on other credible evidence indicating
      possible violations.

6.    Establish an arbitration process for disputes involving the laying-off of any U.S. worker
      who was replaced by an H-lB worker, even of a non-H-IB dependent employer. This
      arbitration process would be largely similar to that laid out in H.R. 3736 except that it
      would be administered by the Secretary of Labor. The arbitrator must base his or her
      decision on a "preponderance ofthe evidence."

7.    Reference in the bill to "administrative remedies" includes the authority to require back
      pay, the hiring of an individual, or reinstatement.

8.    There must be appropriate sanctions for violations of "whistleblower" protections.

9.    Close loopholes in the attestations:

      a.     Strike the provision that "[n]othing in the [recruitment attestation] shall be
             construed to prohibit an employer from using selection standards normal or


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion




                        customary to the type of job involved."

                 b.     Clarify that job contractors can be sanctioned for placing an H-IB worker with an
                        employer who subsequently lays off a U.S. worker within the 90 days following
                        placement.

                 c.     Do not exempt H-IB workers with at least a master's degree or the equivalent
                        from calculations ofthe total number ofH-IB employees.

                 d.     Define lay-offbased on termination for "cause or voluntary termination," but
                        exclude cases where there has been an offer of continuing employment.

           10.   Consolidate the LCA approval and petition processes within DOL, rather than within
                 INS.

           11.   Broaden the definition ofD.S. workers to include aliens authorized to be employed by
                 this act or by the Attorney General.

           12.   Include a provision that prohibits unconscionable contracts.

           13.   Include a "no benching" requirement that an H-IB nonimmigrant in "non-productive
                 status" for reasons such as training, lack of license, lack of assigned work, or other such
                 reason (not including when the employee is unavailable for work) be paid for a 40 hour
                 week or a prorated portion of a 40 hour week during such time.

           14.   Increase the annual cap on H-lB visas to 95,000 in FY 1998, 105,000 in FY 1999, and
                 115,000 in FY 2000. After FY 2000, the visa cap shall return to 65,000.

           15.   Eliminate the 7500 cap on the number of non-physician health care workers admitted
                 under the H-IB program to make the bill consistent with our obligations under the GATS
                 agreement.




                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
