RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN;Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD )   )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-AUG-1998 11:29:34.00

SUBJECT:   here's latest version of Lott letter

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
=====;;;==;==;;;=;;= ATTACHMENT   1 ;======;;;===;==;===
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D96)MAIL45795583C.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57S043F1200000010A000100000000FBFFOS0032001DOI000003000A00000042000000060010
0000004COOOOOOOC005AOOOOOOSC000000010167000000B6000000D00606000100060006D00033
7COOS0000000010000010F00000043616E6F6E204C42502D3820494949006E6C79000000000000


The Honorable Trent Lott
Majority Leader
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510

Dear Senator Lott:

Thank you for your letter regarding the patients' bill of rights. I am pleased to reiterate my
commitment to working with you -- and all Republicans and Democrats in the Congress -- to
pass long overdue legislation this year.

Since last November, I have called on the Congress to pass a strong, enforceable, and bipartisan
patients' bill of rights. During this time, I signed an Executive Memorandum to ensure that the
85 million Americans in Federal health plans receive the patient protections they need, and I have
indicated my support for bipartisan legislation that would extend these protections to all
Americans. With precious few weeks remaining before the Congress adjourns, we must work
together to respond to the nation's call for us to address their concerns about the quality of health
care they are receiving.

Assuring basic patient protections is not and should not be a political issue. I was therefore
disappointed in the partisan manner in which the Republican Leadership bill was developed. It
appears clear that the lack of consultation with the White House or any DeIllocrats during the
development of your legislation contributed to its serious shortcomings and the fact it has failed
to receive the support ofthe patients and doctors it purports to assist. It leaves millions of
Americans without critical patient protections; contains provisions that are more rhetorical than
substantive; completely omits patient protections that virtually every expert in the field believes
are basic and essential; and includes "poison pill" provisions that have nothing to do with a
patients' bill of rights. More specifically, the bill:

Does not cover all health plans and leaves over 100 million Americans completely
unprotected. The provisions in the Senate Republican Leadership bill apply only to
self-insured plans. As a consequence, the bill leaves out over 100 million Americans, including
millions of workers in small businesses. This approach contrasts with the bipartisan
Kassebaum-Kennedy insurance refonn law, which provided a set of basic protections for all
Americans.




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
in the Senate Republican Leadership bill provides virtually no protections to patients because it
allows HMOs themselves, rather than independent health professionals, to arbitrarily define what
services are medically necessary. This structure will make it very difficult for patients to prevail
on an appeal to get the treatment their doctors believe they need.

Fails to guarantee direct access to specialists. The Senate Republican Leadership proposal
fails to ensure that patients with serious health problems have direct access to the specialists they
need. We believe that patients with cancer or heart disease should not be denied access to the
doctors they need to treat their conditions.

Fails to protect patients from abrupt changes in care in the middle of treatment.
The Senate Republican Leadership bill fails to assure continuity-of-care protections when
an employer changes health plans. This deficiency means that pregnant women or individuals
undergoing care for a chronic illness may have their care suddenly altered, potentially causing
serious health consequences.

Reverses course on emergency room protections. The Senate Republican Leadership bill
backs away from the emergency room protections that Congress implemented in a bipartisan
manner for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. The bill
includes a watered-down provision that does not require health plans to cover patients who go to
an emergency room outside their network and does not ensure coverage for any treatment beyond
an initial screening. These provisions put patients at risk for the huge costs associated with
critical emergency treatment.

Allows financial incentives to threaten critical patient care. The Senate Republican
Leadership legislation fails to prohibit secret financial incentives to providers. This would leave
patients vulnerable to financial incentives that limit patient care.

Fails to hold health plans accountable when their actions cause patients serious harm.
The proposed per-day penalties in the Senate Republican Leadership plan fail to hold health
plans accountable when patients suffer serious harm or even death because ofa plan's wrongful
action. For example, if a health plan improperly denies a lifesaving cancer treatment to a child, it
will incur a penalty only for the number of days it takes to reverse its decision; it will not have to
pay the family for all the damages they will suffer as the result of having a child with a now
untreatable disease. And because the plan will not have to pay for all the harm it causes, it will
have insufficient incentive to change its health care practices in the future.

Includes "poison pill" provisions that have nothing to do with a patients' bill of rights.
For example, expanding Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs) before studying the current
demonstration is premature, at best, and could undermine an already unstable insurance market.



                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion



        Despite the shortcomings of the bill, I remain committed to working with you and the
        Democratic Leadership to pass a meaningful patients' bill of rights before the Congress adjourns.
          As I have said, however, I would veto a bill that does not address the serious flaws in the
        current Senate Republican Leadership proposal. I could not sanction presenting a bill to the
        American people that is nothing more than an empty promise.

        Producing a patients' bill of rights that can attract bipartisan support and receive my signature
        will require a full and open debate on the Senate floor that will address important policy
        concerns. To achieve this end, I believe that there must be adequate time and a sufficient
        number of amendments to ensure the bill gives patients the basic protections they need and
        deserve. I am confident that you and Senator Daschle can work out a process that
        accommodates the scheduling needs of the Senate with the health care needs of the American
        public.

        Last year, we worked together in a bipartisan manner to pass a balanced budget which included
        historic Medicare reforms and the largest investment in chi ldren' s health care since the
        enactment of Medicaid. This year, we have another opportunity to work together to improve
        health care for millions of Americans.

        I urge you to make the patients' bill of rights the first order of business for the Senate when it
        returns next week. Further delay threatens the ability of the Congress to pass a bill that I can
        sign into law this year. I stand ready to work with you and Senator Daschle to ensure that
        patients -- not politics -- become a bipartisan priority.

                                                       Sincerely,



                                                       POTUS




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      HeX-Dump Conversion


