RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I           )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-AUG-1998 11:43:38.00

SUBJECT:    AP story on today's speech--before its been given!

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I        )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Not exactly the story we were looking for:


Clinton Tries To Shift Focus

                       By SANDRA SOBIERAJ
                       Associated Press Writer

                       WORCESTER, Mass.   (AP)   President Clinton left his
vacation island
                       today for a one-day bid to refocus public attention on
his policy agenda
                       and away from his personal problems.

                       Republicans say it's a futile mission: Clinton cannot
shed the image of
                       having "wagged his finger and lied in the face of
every American," the
                       party's chairman says.

                     The president came to Worcester in western
Massachusetts to address
                     issues of school safety, juvenile violence and higher
education for police
                     officers. He got a warm airport welcome from high sch
001 students, who
                     were given the morning off school. Massachusetts' two
U. S. senators,
                     both Democrats, turned out to greet his as well.

                       Although the subject was schools, students were
talking among
                       themselves about the president's admission of an
inappropriate
                       relationship with former White House intern Monica
Lewinsky.

                       Olga Papadopoulos, 16, said she didn't really blame
Clinton, adding,
                       "He's just a person. Everybody makes mistakes."

                       Seventeen-year-old Dan Lodi chimed in to add:         "But I


don't think he
                       should have lied to us."

                       The presidential trip comes amid increasing pressure
from prominent
                       Democrats that Clinton make some further explanation,
even an apology,
                       for his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky.

                    Officials conceded that while no decision has been
made, the possibility
                    of a further presidential explanation was on the table
and had not been
                    ruled out. It could come next week in Russia at a news
conference with
                    Russian President Boris Yeltsin.

                    "He's got to sort that advice out himself," White
House spokesman Barry
                    Toiv said.

                       Many Democrats worry that Clinton's televised address
to the nation last
                       week struck the wrong note, opening with an admission
of guilt and
                       regret for misleading the nation over Ms. Lewinsky,
then veering into a
                       bitter attack on Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr,
who is investigating
                       whether Clinton may have tried to obstruct justice in
the Paula Jones
                       sexual harassment lawsuit against him.

                   Facing midterm elections in November, many
congressional Democrats
                   are distancing themselves from Clinton and refusing to
defend him against
                   talk of resignation or impeachment.

                       "He needs to get it behind him as soon as he can and
then say,   'I'm not
                    going to talk about it,'" said Colorado Gov. Roy
Romer, the Democratic
                    National Committee chairman.

                       Anticipating a report to Congress from Starr, some of
Clinton's political
                       advisers want to send lawmakers their own report to
counter some of the
                       prosecutor's conclusions.

                       Such a move would be designed to provide Clinton's
Democratic allies
                       on Capitol Hill with ammunition to argue against
starting impeachment
                       proceedings in the Lewinsky case and to influence
public perceptions
                       too, officials said.

                       For now, Toiv said the president's main emphasis was

..
,
     moving on an
                           agenda that included the Russian trip and one to
     Ireland in early
                           September and a focus on such issues as education,
     health care and the
                           environment.

                           Clinton headed to worcester at an invitation issued
     months ago by the
                           area's freshman Democratic congressman, Rep. Jim
     McGovern, who
                         said that while his constituents were eager to hear
     talk about issues, they
                         and he were "disappointed" at the president's actions
     in the Lewinsky
                         affair.

                           One local Democrat, City councilwoman Konstantina
     Lukes, said she
                           refused when the White House asked her to meet Clinton
     at the airport
                           this morning.

                           Her explanation: "I don't approve of the president's
     behavior."

                           Republicans also weighed in.

                           "Leading Democrats across the country are openly
     questioning the
                         validity of a Clinton presidency after he wagged his
     finger and lied in the
                         face of every American," Jim Nicholson, chairman of the
      Republican
                         National Committee, said in a statement.

                           During the Worcester visit Clinton released a 32-page
     guidebook
                           prepared by the Education and Justice departments on
     what to look for
                           and what do to prevent violence in schools. The
     200,000 copies are
                           being sent to all schools, with extra copies available
     for parents and
                           interest groups.

                           The book was written to remind people that less than 1
     percent of violent
                           deaths of children occur on school grounds, compared
     with a much
                           higher risk of death at home or in the community.

                           It said teachers, parents and students should look for
     multiple signs of
                         trouble, including social withdrawal, uncontrolled
     anger, expressions of
                         violence in writings and drawings, patterns of bul
     lying and histories of
                         disciplinary problems.

·   ,   .
                        (27 Aug 1998 10:41 EDT)


