   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

   CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP   [ WHO I )

   CREATION DATE/TIME:28-AUG-1998 16:20:53.00

   SUBJECT:    DPC Daily Items 8/24-8/27

   TO: Bruce N. Reed { CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I
   READ: UNKNOWN

   TO: Elena Kagan { CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I
   READ:UNKNOWN

   TEXT:
   ---------------------- Forwarded by Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP on 08/28/98 04:20
   PM ---------------------------


   Kevin S. Moran      08/28/98 12:11:09 PM

   Record Type:       Record

   To:      Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
   cc:
   Subject:         Hope this is helpful. k


   DPC REPORT (8/26)

    Single Sex Schools. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson has asked for the
   Education Department to provide views by Friday on an amendment she will
   try to attach to the Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill regarding
   single sex education. The amendment would permit school districts to use
   ESEA Title VI (an education block grant) funds for the purpose of
   establishing single sex schools, by "clarifying" that Title IX allows this
   use so long as the district provides comparable educational opportunities
   to students of both genders. Unless you instruct us otherwise, we are
   planning to advise Senator Hutchinson not to offer her amendment, while
   assuring her that we share her goal of permitting districts to establish
   single-sex schools. We will tell Senator Hutchinson that her amendment is
   unnecessary because Title IX already allows districts to establish
   single-sex schools so long as they provide comparable opportunities to
   students of both sexes.   There is an open question about whether the
   comparable opportunity standard requires single sex schools for each
   gender or, alternatively, allows districts to establish a single-sex
   school for one sex only.   (This is the question raised by New York City's
   all-girls school.)  Hutchinson's amendment, however, does nothing to
   answer this question.   Further, her amendment might be read to imply that
   school districts cannot use other federal funds to establish single-sex
   schools. Given these substantive problems, we believe there is no reason
   to depart from our general opposition to riders on appropriations bills,
   or to provoke a fight with the women's community, which largely opposes
   the amendment.

    Education Event.  We are working with NEC to plan a back-to-school event
   for Monday, in which you can highlight your education agenda and challenge
   the returning Congress to enact it. You can call on Congress to enact
   legislation to modernize schools, reduce class size, expand charter
   schools, and promote early literacy, as well as to reauthorize the Higher


Education Act which includes your teacher preparation and High Hopes
initiatives. You also can use this occasion to reiterate your education
and training priorities for the Labor-HHS-Education appropriations bill.
The event probably will take place at a suburban Maryland elementary
school.

DPC REPORT (8/25)

 Food Safety Council.  Secretaries Glickman and Shalala and Director Lane
briefed the press this afternoon on the Executive Order you approved over
the weekend to establish a new Council on Food Safety.  As you know, the
Council is charged with improving coordination among the various federal
agencies that deal with food safety issues by developing a comprehensive
food safety plan and a unified food safety budget. The Council also is
charged with reviewing the National Academy of ScienceD,s recent
recommendation that Congress pass legislation establishing a single food
safety agency.  Consumer groups generally praised the Executive Order.
For example, the Center for Science in the Public Interest said that the
Council D&represents an important improvement of the existing food safety
system,DS and the Safe Food Coalition stated that D&the creation of the
Council is a productive step toward improving the safety of AmericaD,s
food supply.DS At the same time, all these groups called on the Council
to support the NASD,s call for legislation establishing a single food
safety agency.  We suspect that HHS and USDA will resist this proposal, in
part for turf reasons.

 New Department of Labor (DoL) Regulations.  Per your request, attached is
a memo overviewing the new DoL regulations that you are tentatively
scheduled to announce in this weekD,s radio address.


