RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO J )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-AUG-1998 18:09:43.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Draft -- Comments Back by 9:00am

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   ( OPD J )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sara M. Latham ( CN=Sara M. Latham/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO J )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP   ( WHO J )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 8/30/98 6:00pm
JordanTamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
TALKING POINTS FOR EDUCATION ROUNDTABLE
HERNDON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
HERNDON, VIRGINIA
August 31, 1998

          [The President and Secretary Riley are introduced into the auditorium and
take their seats at the table. Herndon Elementary School Principal
Michele Freeman makes brief welcoming remarks from the podium; Sec. Riley
introduces the participants to the President , who makes informal opening
remarks .J

        OPENING REMARKS: Thank you for inviting me to be here with you
today.  I want to spend most of our time listening to your ideas and
concerns, and then ID,d like to take a few minutes to talk about what I
believe we must do to achieve the kind of educational excellence our
children need as we move into the 21st century. Vice President Gore is in
Dayton, Ohio today, having the same kind of conversation with parents and
teachers at Carlson Elementary School, and I am looking forward to
continuing these dialogues in the months ahead.


        And now, IO,d like to turn the conversation over to you, starting
with Principal Michele Freeman.

        [The round table discussion begins, led by the President and Secretary
Riley; Secretary Riley wraps up discussion, and introduces the
PresidentO,s concluding remarks at the podium.]

        CONCLUDING REMARKS: I want to thank you all for sharing your
experiences and ideas with me this morning.  From everything you have told
me about what you are doing here -- from your Reading Recovery and
mentoring programs to your Saturday school -- it is clear to me that
Herndon Elementary School is on the right track.

        It is also clear that we share a vision for building the America
we want for our children and our grandchildren, starting by building an
education system for the 21st Century. A world- class system based on
high standards and accountability; a system that involves the community,
bringing parents, teachers, principals, and leaders together; above all,
an education system that gives all of our children -- no matter where they
live or what their racial, ethnic, or economic background -- the same
opportunity to make the most of their God-given potential.

        This is a time of great prosperity for our people.  We have the
lowest unemployment in 28 years ... the smallest percentage of people on
welfare in 29 years ... the smallest government since John F. Kennedy was
President ... the highest home ownership rate in history ... and we are
about to realize the first balanced budget and surplus in 29 years.

          All Americans should be proud of our progress. But this is not
a time to rest, for the world is changing very quickly. We must use the
confidence, the resources, and the understanding we have acquired in the
last six years to face the long-term challenges ahead. There is critical
business ahead of us -- business we must take up now that Congress has
returned to Washington.

        To build the America we want in the 21st Century, we must keep our
economy growing, by continuing to pursue the policies that have helped to
create our prosperity.  Before we touch a penny of our budget surplus, we
must save Social Security for future generations. We must continue to
work to make sure every American family has access to quality health care
   We must continue to work to preserve and protect our environment.
Finally, and in many ways, most important, we must redouble our efforts to
give our children the best education in the world.

        To do our part to meet that challenge, I have proposed a
comprehensive education agenda with high national standards ... more well
qualified teachers ... smaller classes ... modern schools equipped with
computers ... reading tutors for children who are falling behind ...
before- and after-school programs to keep young people learning in the
classroom ... and summer job programs to give young people the skills they
need to succeed once they leave school.

        But to build an education system for the 21st Century, Congress
must also do its part. Here are the steps I believe Congress must take:

        First, provide our children with modern schools, smaller classes, and
better teachers. We should pass tax credits to rebuild, modernize and
build over 5,000 public schools.  I also calIon the Congress to enact and
fully fund my plan to reduce class size to an average of 18 in grades 1
through 3 by helping local schools hire 100,000 new teachers.

'.
             Second, make sure our children have the skills they need for the jobs of
     the future, by fully funding for my plan to equip our nationO,s classrooms
     with computers and cutting edge educational software, and to train our
     teachers in the new technology.

              Third, strengthen and expand charter schools, by passing bipartisan
     legislation that will help meet my goal of establishing 3,000 charter
     schools.

             Fourth, reauthorize the Higher Education Act.  From middle school through
     college, this critically important legislation will help more of our
     children to reach their highest potential, by improving teacher education,
     expanding mentoring pro~rams, reducing interest rates on student loans,
     and extending the Pell Grant program and the Federal Work Study program,
     which helps students work their way through college.

             Fifth, make sure every child can read independently by the end of the
     third grade, by passing a bipartisan Early Literacy Bill, that will help
     train our teachers and mobilize an army of volunteer literacy tutors.

             Sixth, invest in all of our childrenO,s future by strengthening our
     public schools.  I have proposed to expand Head Start so more children
     come to school ready to learn ... to strengthen after-school programs for
     hundreds of thousands of children ... to help more disadvantaged children
     master the basics and learn to high standards ... to keep thousands of
     Hispanic American young people from dropping out of school ... and to keep
     our children safe by supporting our Safe and Drug-Free Schools program.

             Unfortunately, the House Republican Bill falls far short of these
     goals -- and short changes our childrenO,s futures in the process.  I urge
     the Congress to fully fund these vitally important programs.

             Finally, Congress should not turn its back on the Summer Jobs Program,
     which gives more than 500,000 young people the chance to work and learn
     new skills. At a time when we should be doing everything we can to help
     our young people compete for the jobs of tomorrow, we simply cannot afford
     to cut this vitally important program. But the House Republican budget
     would do exactly that.

             Tomorrow, a Senate subcommittee will likely take up this matter.
     I am confident that the Senate will vote to restore funding for the Summer
     Jobs program -- and other critical investments in education -- that have
     helped so many young people to reach their dreams.

               These are the steps I believe Congress must take to give our
     children the education they need and deserve. I look forward to working
     with the Congress every step of the way to meet this great challenge.
     For, as President Lincoln once said: O&education is the most important
     thing we as a people can be engaged in.08  If we really want to build a
     stronger America in the 21st Century, then we must put progress ahead of
     partisanship, people over politics, and our childrenO,s future above all
     else.

            Thank you.


