RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: "Christopher Edley, Jr." <edley@law.harvard.edu> ( "Christopher Edley, Jr."

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-SEP-1998 17:26:56.00

SUBJECT:   Draft POTUS memo on race book

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rebecca M. Blank ( CN=Rebecca M. Blank/OU=CEA/O=EOP [ CEA 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lynn G. Cutler ( CN=Lynn G. Cutler/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Edward W. Correia ( CN=Edward W. Correia/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Judith A. Winston ( CN=Judith A. Winston/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michele Cavataio ( CN=Michele Cavataio/OU=PIR/O=EOP   [ PIR 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Francis S. Redburn ( CN=Francis S. Redburn/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sidney Blumenthal   ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: terry.edmonds@ssa.gov ( terry.edmonds@ssa.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO!O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: aedmondsl@home.com ( aedmondsl@home.com [ UNKNOWN]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

cc: Jane T. Price-Smith ( CN=Jane T. Price-Smith/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Lin Liu ( CN=Lin Liu/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Wenger ( CN=Michael Wenger/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jacinta Ma ( CN=Jacinta Ma/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ]
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: David Campt ( CN=David Campt/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: John M. Goering ( CN=John M. Goering/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michele Cavataio ( CN=Michele Cavataio/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Scott R. Palmer ( CN=Scott R. Palmer/OU=PIR/O=EOP [ PIR ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Comrades:

Have a good weekend. You will enjoy it more if you take a look at the
attached draft memorandum, which has been sent to the Staff Secretary for
clearance. Maria is holding a clearance meeting on Tuesday afternoon at 4
pm, but comments are welcome before or after that. The memo is due in to
POTUS mid-week. Sorry I couldn't finish this earlier in the day.


 - Memo-v6.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D94]MAIL473482743.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S0430S630000010A0201000000020S000000S2840100000200OOOB07CSFE67E807EE6SE8S2
CB3D3SDCS86A6738F72CBIB6ECASIC6S9D7FDBSC8FFD266DFB99ASSlD293E6CE0902S36A49SF97
632F9992D4928BS07D27D72FEC13E2DB9C85BI0787FSD693B47697F02911724C40B6FSDSEII04B




Draft v6
                                                                                                September 9, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

From:            Christopher Edley, Jr.
                 Professor of Law

Through:         Maria Echaveste
                 Deputy Chief of Staff

Re:     Progress Report on the Race Book, and Request for Interim Guidance


This memorandum is organized in the following sections:

        1.       Introduction, process and organization of the effort
        II.      The Vision (book chapter 2), and basic themes
        III.     The W orkplan (chapter 6)
        IV.      Leadership (chapter 7)
        V.       Next steps, and summary of decisions requested


                    L   INTRODUCTION, PROCESS AND ORGANIZATION OF THE EFFORT


The purpose of this memorandum is to review our progress, confirm our general direction, and
solicit interim guidance on a few substantive matters. Most important, Part II is a first attempt
to sketch your "vision" of One America with racial justice and equal opportunity in the 21 st
century. Then, Part III adds some flesh to key portions of the "workplan" chapter outline you
have already seen, offering a partial menu of ideas.! We want to know if this conceptual


IThe current detailed (and daunting) outline of the book is at Tab A. The chapter outline is:
    Introduction:      One America in the 21" Century
    Chapter 1:         Where Is America On Race, And Where Are We Going?




                                                                         ement System                     p.l
                                                  Automated Records Manag
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
and programmatic. White House policy staff are fully engaged and have both contributed to
this workplan material and reviewed this memorandum. Important disagreements and special
concurrences are noted in this document or accompanying memoranda.

We hope to complete the workplan menu within two weeks and, based on your tentative
approval of several ideas, proceed with more detailed policy development between now and early
November. This is key: I want these first stages of developing the workplan to emphasize
thoughtfulness and boldness in the selection of the challenges, goals, themes and general
strategies, connecting those to the vision. The next step, for greater detail over the next two
months, is to figure out more concretely what ought to be done by whom (federal government?
parents?). Throughout, Maria Echaveste will ensure that the interests of the policy councils are
well regarded, that the formal clearance process is used when appropriate, and that I can appeal
to you with any conflicts we cannot resolve in a timely way.

We have four working groups to help prepare the policy, or "workplan" chapter. These are
co-led by the appropriate NEC or DPC staff and me. As yet, they do not span the entire range of
subjects you may want to cover, but they are a good start:
               Education
               Economic Development and Employment Opportunity
               Criminal Justice and Community Security
               Civil Rights Enforcement
We also have less elaborate collaborative discussions moving forward on: Health, Strengthening
Families, Native Americans, and Democracy/Civic Engagement. The "book team" includes a
handful of PIR staff, and the addition soon of Terry Edmonds. I'm confident that several White
House and OMB staff will also play critical roles, as they have in preparation of this document.

Outreach: Finally, Maria has assigned Minyon Moore and OPL the overall responsibility for
coordinating external consultations by the outreach offices and, through Cabinet Affairs,
conversations with key appointees in the agencies. Throughout September, many members of
your staff will be making calls or conducting meetings with some 400 individuals, asking about

   Chapter 2:     More Than A Dream: Racial And Ethnic Justice In The 21" Century
   Chapter 3:     Wrestling Lessons: Honest, Constructive Engagement Of Our Vexing Differences
   Chapter 4:     Promising Practices: How To Build Bridges That Connect People Across Lines Of Class And
                  Color, Creating Community And Opportunity
   Chapter 5:     The Record Of The Clinton-Gore Administration
   Chapter 6:     A Workplan For Our Nation
   Chapter 7:     Leadership For One America
   Chapter 8:     Conclusion


Pj472843~ OPD_HTMLj[lj
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion                               p.2
Advisory Board's work, and any elements they think it is especially important for you to
communicate in your report. We will share some of the substantive responses with you, but all of
them will be weighed by the book team.



                                                  **
                           II   THE VISION CHAPTER, AND BASIC THEMES


This section summarizes my best sense of your central vision for the book -- chapter 2 in the
current outline. It builds on earlier material sent to you by Sidney Blumenthal and by me, as well
as previous statements by you. In the book, the vision discussion will be preceded by an
introduction and by the chapter describing where America has been and is on race, including
demographics, discrimination, disparities, and intergroup relations. While not yet in your
language, what follows is an effort to capture the key ideas and their interrelationships. At the end
of the section, we also want to engage you on some cross-cutting questions, such as the role of
government.


(a)     Why is this subject so important for us to tackle?

       Renewing America for the new century: For six years, I have worked to prepare America
       for the challenges of the 21 st century. We have put our fiscal house in order, taken
       important steps to strengthen the international economic system, worked at home and
       abroad to create a post-cold war national security framework, launched an investment
       program in vital areas of education, training, new technologies and environmental
       protection. One additional area, without which we cannot succeed in the decades ahead,
       is overcoming the divisions of race and ethnicity so that we can be One America, united
       in a web of mutuality that gives us the strength to be our best as individuals, as
       communities and as a nation.

        Global and historical context" The difficulty of the problem is evident not only from our
       own national history, but from events around the world - even today. The conflict is
       commonplace, as differences give rise to hatreds and then bloodshed. As President, I've
       seen it over and over again, and struggled to find ways that, through our actions and
       example, this nation could help troubled societies see their shared humanity and find
       peace. But make no mistake: This struggle to build peace and strength out of differences
       is a struggle against deep failings and sinfulness that seem inherent in the human spirit. In


                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                             p.3
      never-ending struggle. We should expect no easier a task when it comes to dealing with
      our differences here in America.

      The stakes: On a more practical plane, making diversity a source of strength rather than
      division promises great rewards in social peace and home and economic success globally.

      New complexity: The civil rights movement of three and four decades ago was largely
      framed in black and white, but led to bursts of energy and progress for other minorities
      and for women. Today's diversity gives us great opportunities, but also more complex
      challenges.

      Cause [or confidence: There is cause for confidence, because our ideals and values are far
      more than words locked behind glass in the National Archives. They are an incandescent
      beacon for peoples worldwide, and the lodestar by which we chart our own course and
      criticize our missteps. Our noblest moments and wisest leaders are marked not by the
      exploitation of difference, but by recalling us to the commitments of equality, tolerance,
      opportunity and justice. In my life, I have seen this most profoundly in the struggle
      against racial segregation and bigotry. No nation matches our capacity for moral
      greatness.

(b)    What would it mean to have a fuD measure of racial justice and opportunity in America?
       What would our relationships be like, and what would society look like?

       Vision of community: [Celebration of our diversity, not mere tolerance of our differences;
      building inclusive communities and organizations to take advantage of the benefits and
      strengths that flow from diversity. (Examples from forums, cor~espondence, etc.)]

      "One America" does not mean that we lose our ethnic identities, becoming some
      homogenized undifferentiated mass. We can be proud of our cultural identities and
      distinctiveness, and at the same time be proud of and loyal to America - indeed, that is
      one of the most important elements of our nation's greatness.

      In religion, for example, scholars tell us that we are the most observant of developed
      nations, and that freedom of religion and separation of church and state are important
      parts of the explanation. We are a nation full of religious individuals, yet we do not all
      worship in the same way. Indeed, our civic values are that we tolerate and respect
      different religious traditions, and celebrate the legal and civic values that make diversity



~ 2472843~ OPD_ HTML_l[l}
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion                         p,4
defining greatness of America. And much of the rest of the world recognizes this too.

So, too, with our racial and ethnic diversity. Our greatness in the decades ahead depends
not merely on overcoming prejudice and bigotry rooted in our differences, and not only
in tolerating differences. We must instead celebrate those differences as a source of
richness and strength. Our personal lives are enriched by this diversity, and our society
and economy are strengthened by it.

In the community of America, the things that connect us must be stronger than those that
divide us. A "community" means shared interests. But we must also have a shared
concern for our collective advancement, and mutual concern for each other. Transcending
differences, while respecting them, is part of creating such a community.

So there is a delicate balance, because we have far too much to lose if we retreat into
ethnic enclaves - walled off from one another by prejudice, stereotypes or even simple
ignorance and misunderstanding. We sacrifice greatness and goodness, richness and
riches, if by circumstance or choice we separate ourselves into subcommunities along the
very fracture lines that have traced our national racial tragedies since Europeans arrived on
these shores.

Vision ofopportunity: [Opportunity enjoyed so equally that there is no discernable legacy
of slavery, colonization or conquest; of Jim Crow or internment. (Examples from forums,
correspondence etc.)]

We have legacies of slavery, conquest and colonialism; of Jim Crow and racist
immigration quotas. The inheritance is evident in the patterns of our lives: the racially
isolated communities, the gaping disparities in educational achievement, employment,
criminal victimization and wealth; the still too-rare close friendships across lines of race.
This inheritance is a burden to our spirits and a tax on our prosperity. Perhaps most
tragically, for too many of our fellow citizens, the legacy has shackled dreams that are
every American's inalienable right. This is wrong, and we can do better.

One way our children and grandchildren will know when we have achieved racial justice
and opportunity is that the evidence of America's legacy of inequality will be found only
in history books, and not in brutal social and economic disparities surrounding them.

Vision ofresponsibiJity: Responsibilities of citizenship; responsibility to reach out to
others; responsibility of each of to combat whatever stereotypes and fears we may have;




                                                                                        p.5
                                      Automated Records Management System
                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
        We must do this for our children and their children. We must do this to honor those
       who have sacrificed over the generations in earlier battles, including civil rights battles, to
       put our sacred civic values into practice. And I believe we must do this to honor the God
       who has created us all equal, and blessed our nation in so many countless ways.


(c)    Why is this vision preferable to alternative, competing visions?

       Why embracing "equal opportunity" is necessary, but insufficient alone to produce a full
       measure of justice and fairness in One America.

       Why color blindness makes sense, and why it doesn't.

       Why assimilation as Americans is important, but not an assimilation that seeks to erase
       our diverse identities. Is tolerance of differences sufficient, or must there be more?

                                                  **

                                   IlL   THE WORKPLAN CHAPTER


The purpose of this chapter is to explain the most important steps the nation must take over the
next decade in pursuit of your vision of racial justice and opportunity, as described earlier in the
book. As with the promising practices chapter, you want to provide inspiring "news you can
use" to people in communities and organizations across the nation who are looking for ideas.
The workplan is organized by policy sectors, and within each sector it will contain federal, state,
local, private and personal elements. This is not just about the federal government, or
government generally. Few items will have FY 2000 budget impacts, although several will have
"down payments" in Administration accomplishments and earlier proposals. (The ideas which
follow reflect substantial contributions from DPC, NEC and OMB; this memorandum has been
through an accelerated clearance process. Comments from your advisors are noted in this
document or in appended memoranda.)

The book should be highly thematic, avoiding an exhaustive and mind-numbing recitation of
comprehensive programmatic details. But it must contain just enough pointed recommendations
to leave the reader with a sense that you have provided concrete direction, not just rhetoric. This
also entails being very selective - not every good idea for addressing every important problem.
In areas where thoughtfulness or clarity requires more program detail, the final document can use



                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                                               p.6
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

Two final points. The boldness you have requested in policy ideas seems in some cases to come
in the statement of a national goal ("close disparities in education achievement by X percent"),
and in other cases may not be evident until we offer specific public or private interventions to
advance the goal. Relatedly, in the stating the goals we have repeatedly between brave aspirations
and statements that are more cautious and achievable. We need your general guidance on this.

                                                  *

 6.2       THE EDUCATION SECTION OF THE WORKPLAN

Apart from the economy, I assume that education will be the clear first-among-equals in your
workplan for the nation, receiving disproportionate emphasis throughout the book. Despite
improvements over the last several decades, racial disparities in opportunity and achievement
persist throughout the education pipeline, and these disparities are powerful obstacles to
achieving your vision. We've tolerated it for too long. It is wrong. Therefore, the workplan
focuses on areas of significant disparity that have the greatest impact on educational outcomes.
It also emphasizes the instrumental and ethical necessity of heightened responsibility and
accountability.

In addition, racial isolation, often in combination with poverty concentration, remains a problem
both among and within our schools, presenting barriers to achievement, excellence, and to your
vision of mutual understanding and community. This is the third pillar of the education
workplan.

        -- Outline of the section

Introduction/Context

                Education is primary [only central?] to achieving my vision. This requires:

                 (1)    eliminating racial disparities in educational opportunity and achievement;
                 (2)    reinforcing responsibility and strengthening accountability for
                        administrators, teachers and students, as well as for the political
                        institutions governing education; and
                 (3)    promoting racial and economic integration in education.



Pj4728435.. OPD_HTMLj[l]

                                                   Automated Records Management System         p.7
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                  race has divided us, but also because we need to reassess the roles of the different
                  levels of government and of the family in education. The old formulas need
                  revision, the old problems need new thinking, and the old values need new life.

                 We need to provide every family, regardless of race or zip code, with an
                  Education Bill of Rights. 2


(a)      Close the racial gap in opportunity and achievement. Notwithstanding important
         progress, significant racial disparities in achievement persist. We must close these gaps
         and raise the bar for everyone. This means overcoming racial disparities in the
         educational opportunity available to every child - including both resources and
         expectations - and simultaneously insisting on high standards for achievement. Beyond
         this, we must improve our ability to make targeted, individualized efforts to ensure that
         every child succeeds to his or her full potential. Among the key elements of an education
         bill of rights for equal opportunity and achievement:

          Parenting and early childhood: Ensure that every child has a parent or other adult
         actively engaged in that child's learning, and that every young child has access to early
         learning opportunities.

         Teaching: bnprove the quality of teacher training, ensure that high-quality teachers are
         equitably distributed, and ensure that teachers promote high expectations for students of
         all races.

        Curriculum and standards: Ensure that every child has access to challenging curricula
        tied to high standards, and that tracking does not prevent any child from achieving his or


2 Such a Bill of Rights might include the following:
(1)     Every child shall have a parent or other adult actively engaged in hisjher learning and have access to support
        services to help that child achieve to his/her full potential.
(2)     Every child shall have access to early learning opportunities.
(3)     All parents have the right to send their children to equitably funded schools that are accountable for their
        child's learning.
(4)     Every child shall have access to high-quality teachers.
(5)     Every child shall be held to high expectations and standards and have access to challenging curricula.
(6)     Every child shall have access to adequate facilities and modern technology.
(7)     Every LEP child shall have access to the tools necessary to help himjher learn English within three years.
(8)     Every child shall learn in a safe environment.
(9)     All parents and children shall have the right to choose to attend racially and ethnically integrated schools.
(10)    Every high school graduate shall have the financial support and opportunity to go to college.




                                                            Automated Records Management System             p.8
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
      complete educational experience for all students than high-quality segregated schools.
      Conversely, ineffective, racially isolated schools in high-poverty areas present our
      greatest obstacle to closing the disparities in opportunity and achievement.

      Educate the public on the value of inclusion, diversity and integration -- reviving that
      ideal: An inclusive community of students and educators can: improve teaching and
      learning by enriching the learning environment with diverse perspectives; strengthen
      students' critical-thinking skills by challenging their existing perspectives; teach students
      how to interact comfortably with people different from themselves and thereby how to
      function as good neighbors, colleagues and citizens in our diverse democratic society;
      improve students' preparation for employment by teaching them the value of diverse
      perspectives, how to function in diverse business settings, and how to communicate
      effectively in our increasingly diverse domestic marketplace and the expanding global
      marketplace; and foster the advancement of knowledge by spurring study in new areas of
      concern.

      Reduce racial segregation and isolation among schools: This is not a call for massive,
      federally mandated strategies where there is no constitutional violation demanding
      court-supervised remedies. Instead, parents and educators should make use of a range of
      measures such as magnet schools, multi district transfer programs, and so forth. Most
      important, we must better appreciate the important stake we have in making diversity
      work in the world of our children. Schools of unquestioned excellence are the easiest to
      make and keep diverse.

      Reduce segregation within schools: Even in diverse schools, evidence shows that
      students are often resegregated into racially homogenous classes through tracking and
      other mechanisms, thereby reducing their opportunities to learn together and have
      positive cross-racial interactions.

      Inclusion in higher education: Promote access and diversity in higher education, and
      foster the educational benefits of diversity. Mend, don't end, affirmative action. And
      wherever possible, use creative race-neutral mechanisms in admissions and in the K-12
      pipeline. Ensure that in sustaining the crucial role ofHBCUs, HSls, and Tribal colleges
      (which are integrated) we don't "excuse" historically white institutions from the principle
      of excellence-through-inclusion.

      - Discussion issues on the education workplan

      Are you comfortable with the three major pillars: closing the race gap in opportunity and
      achievement; accountability and governance; attacking racial isolation?


Pj472843~ OPD_HTMLj[lj


                                                                                           p.IO
                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
        Can any of them be demoted for attention in textual boxes rather than in your narrative?

        Can we explore some rethinking of the federal role in order to tackle these disparities?



                                                 *
 6.4   CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND COMMUNITY SECURITY


From hate crimes to crack houses, from police misconduct to police hiring, from disparate
incarceration rates to racial profiling -- barely a week goes by without some aspect of crime and
criminal justice standing as a lightening rod for racial and ethnic tensions. No area is more
freighted with divisive stereotypes and misunderstanding. Yet it must be tackled with vigor
because victimization and criminality destroy communities and families, just as they fuel
alienation and division.


        -- Outline a/the section

Introduction/Context

              Racial disparities exist in both the realities and perceptions of crime and the
               administration of justice: communities of color disproportionately bear the social,
               economic, and personal costs of crime, and, according to polls, have less
               confidence in the fairness of the criminal justice system than do whites.

              Building One America requires building a criminal justice system that serves and
               treats Americans of all races fully and fairly, and thereby closes the trust gap
               while making community security a right enjoyed equally.

(a)     Community Security: Eliminate racial disparities in victimization. The right to be
        secure cannot be discounted by race. Every American is entitled to live in a safe
        community, and the race of residents shouldn't tell us the crime rate. From 1992 to
        1997, rates of violent crime in America have decreased, but disparate victimization rates
        persist. Tackling this problem directly is part of the opportunity agenda, as well as a
        matter of decent fairness. The Administration's record has numerous elements, which
        we can build upon and target to close the disparities.

(b)     Keep young people out of the criminal justice system, and for those who have
        contact with it, make it their last. Racial minorities, especially young, black males, are
        more likely than whites to be both the offenders and victims of certain crimes, including

~ 24728435.. OPD_ HTMLj[l}


                                                                                                p.ll
                                                     Automated Records l\-1anagemem ::'j.>lem
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
         supervision of the criminal justice system (on probation, in prison, or on parole), and the
         chance that a young, black male will go to prison during his lifetime is nearly 30%. The
         realities are flatly inconsistent an American vision of racial justice and equal opportunity.

(c)      Build greater fairness and trust in the criminal system. Several past and present
         factors contribute to mistrust in our criminal justice system among persons of color,
         including negative interactions, disparities in the administration of justice (incarceration,
         sentencing, death penalty), and lagging diversity in law enforcement (police, prosecutors,
         judges, juries). Without more trust, creating safe communities is impossible, because
         legitimacy, support and cooperation don't come free.

         Prohibit the use of racial profiling.) No American should be subject to disparate
         application of the state's policing power because ofhislher race. Statistically efficient
         allocation of resources, some claim, justifies impositions on innocent persons, while
         perpetuating stereotypes and contributing to tensions. Targeting based on color, without
         individualized evidence, is rarely if ever fair and just.

         Pursue zero tolerance for racially suspect police misconduct and brutality: Whi Ie the
         vast majority of police are dedicated public servants who deserve our respect and support,
         several high-profile cases illustrate that incidents of police misconduct and brutality
         motivated by racial animus still occur. We are deeply divided in perceptions of the
         magnitude of the problem.

         Eliminate racial discrimination and unjustified disparities in incarceration, sentencing,
         and imposition of the death penalty.

         Increase diversity and representation in the criminal justice system.


         -- Discussion issues on the criminal justice workplan

         Can we speak of community safety as a "right", and the racial disparities in victimization
         as flatly inconsistent with your vision? If so, are disparities a fair index of this aspect of
         racial justice and opportunity?

         Should we "prohibit" racial profiling, or "restrict" it?



3Profiling will also be considered in the "Wrestling Lessons" chapter, as one of the hard questions that forces us to
think about differences in values and perceptions.


~2472843s.. OPD_ HTML_I[IJ


                                                             Automated Records Management System               p.12
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
        attention to prevention, diversion and post-incarceration?

        Can we assume that the primary public sector role is state and local, or do you envision
        continued growth in the federal role?

                                                  *

 6.7    THE CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT SECTION OF THE WORKPLAN


We have considered distributing the civil rights law enforcement issues in several sectoral
subsections - as components of the education or jobs strategies, for example. But for now, I want
to press ahead as sketched below because the audience will appropriately expect some attention
to the traditional antidiscrimination enforcement agenda. This also permits you to teach about
this unfinished work. Moreover, the best opportunities for boldness are in cross cutting issues,
among them: policy judgments about the lawfulness under Title VI of persistent resource
disparities; retooling agency enforcement strategies to emphasize proactive technical assistance
and voluntary action; and rethinking the legal framework and enforcement priorities to reflect our
21 sl century diversity.

We are joined at the hip with Chuck Ruff, and will cooperate in his effort to put before you
suggested civil rights enforcement priorities for the next two years.

        -- Outline of the section

Introduction/Context

        Persistence of discrimination, and of enforcement backlogs.

        We have opportunities to strengthen and more aggressively enforce civil rights principles,
        and also support appropriate voluntary actions that promote equal opportunity and access.
        This includes defending disparate impact doctrine, and defending affirmative action.

        The traditional agenda needs renovation to (i) increase its efficiency at handling the retail
        problem of discrimination; (ii) contribute more directly to the opportunity agenda in
        education, jobs and community economics; (iii) reflect our 21 sl century diversity.


(a)     Overcome racial disparities in opportunity by expanding the use of civil rights
        enforcement. Civil rights enforcement can play an especially important role in




                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                                              p.13
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
      and focus civil rights enforcement to complement the opportunity agenda.

      Strengthen antidiscrimination laws and enforcement procedures: For example, we
      could amend Title II, which prohibits discrimination in public accommodations, to
      include businesses that provide goods and services. At present, racial discrimination in
      retail sales (e.g., the Eddie Bauer case in which a black teenager was ordered by a security
      guard to strip off his shirt because he did not have a sales receipt) does not raise a strong
      federal cause of action. We nearly abandoned pattern and practice investigations during
      the 1980s. That was wrong.

      Use Title VI to address racial disparities: No federal money should be spent in a
      manner that supports unjustified racial disparities in opportunity. For example, in
      education, Title VI prohibits policies and practices that have an unjustified disparate
      impact on select racial groups in terms of access to educational resources, tracking into
      challenging courses, the use of un validated high stakes tests, and more. We should
      strengthen Title VI enforcement.

      How much discrimination is there? We should expand research on the extent of racial
      discrimination, using the best available methodologies (testers where appropriate), in
      such areas as employment, housing, and access to capital. The results of such testing
      should be published in an annual report card.

(b)   Fully address all forms of discrimination affecting our increasingly diverse
      population by strengthening civil rights laws and enforcement. We must retool our
      civil rights laws and refocus enforcement efforts to fully address civil rights issues
      affecting our diverse citizenry.

      New immigrants: Strengthen laws and enforcement to promote the rights of new
      immigrants. For example, in immigration and employment, we could expand
      enforcement against labor abuses in "sweatshops," the victims of which are often new
      immigrants of Hispanic or Asian origin, and amend present laws to stabilize the
      immigration status of persons who report labor abuses so those persons do not fear
      reprisal, official or private.

      Language acquisition: Promote the rights ofLEP populations. For example, in
      education, we could develop regulations to clarify the Lau standard concerning what legal
      requirements schools must meet in educating LEP students.

      Learning your rights: Educate immigrant and LEP populations about civil rights laws
      and mechanisms. We should promote outreach to immigrant and LEP populations
      whose rights are protected but who are underutilizing civil rights laws.

~2472843~ OPD_ HTMLj[lJ


                                                                                           p.14
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
      conjunction with enforcement of civil rights laws. In addition to reacting to civil
      rights complaints, civil rights enforcement agencies should act proactively to encourage
      and support voluntary compliance with civil rights laws and values.
      Expand civil rights consultations and clarify legal standards: There are civil rights
      areas where both the law and policy are unclear and where people of good will may be
      managing inappropriate programs. We should act to clarify legal standards and to
      encourage actors to seek guidance concerning their civil rights obligations. We could
      promote laws or regulations encouraging voluntary consultations with civil rights
      agencies. If an actor voluntarily submits hislher practice for civil rights review, he/she is
      safe harbored and/or any agreement approved by the civil rights agency following that
      review would be defended by the federal government if later challenged by a third party.

      Expand proactive enforcement: Absent a formal complaint, where potential civil rights
      violations are discovered, civil rights agencies should follow up with the party to correct
      the injustice. If discussions are not fruitful, the enforcement agency reserves the right to
      launch a more formal civil rights enforcement examination. For example, in education,
      the Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights (OCR) recently learned of a
      Georgia education policy that placed students into gifted and talent programs based solely
      on IQ test scores, despite the fact that the IQ test was not validated for that purpose nor
      validated to be the sale factor for any purpose. This policy led to a disproportionately
      low number of minority students being admitted to gifted and talented programs. OCR
      consulted with Georgia officials, and the policy was properly amended.


(d)   Mend, don't end, affirmative action as enforcement remedy and voluntary measure
      to promote access and inclusion

(e)   [Hate crimes.]


      -- Discussion issues on the civil rights workplan

      After further interagency discussion, we will need policy guidance about a number of
      Title VI issues.

      Should we develop a package addressing "the new diversity"?




                                                          Automated Records Management System p.IS
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
       end" in various sectors?

                                                 **


                                  IV. THE LEADERSHIP CHAPTER

Following the workplan chapter, you can challenge leaders in a range of sectors to do their part,
and combine this with a vision of locally-based efforts to use the promising practices and devise
locally-oriented workplans. Finally, in this chapter you should describe the ongoing mechanism
within the White House to help support the sectoral leadership, community-based leadership, and
the Federal government elements of your workplan.


(aJ    Challenges for sectoral leadership

We expect, by the publication date, to have worked successfully with leadership groups in a few
sectors, prompting them to develop a list of action steps tailored to their sector, and a practical
strategy for implementation. A brief status report on what we have initiated follows.

       Higher Education: With staff support from the American Council on Education, a core
       group of college and university presidents is working to establish a broader coalition that
       will lead a coordinated campaign to educate the public about the value of diversity in
       higher education and to share campus practices that promote diversity. We expect them to
       launch the effort, designed with Frank Greer as lead consultant, sometime this fall.
       (There is a possibility of using a White House event to bless the undertaking.)

       Faith Community: Sandy Cloud of the National Conference for Community and
       Justice has agreed to lead a steering committee in convening, on October 22 and
       October 23, an implementation summit at which a group of faith leaders will write
       and commit to a practical work plan for both national and community-based action, and
       devise a coalition mechanism for follow through. This will include special efforts to reach
       those faith communities that have not traditionally been leaders in racial justice. In
       addition, at your September 11 breakfast for religious leaders, you will have an
       opportunity to mention Sandy Cloud's leadership, and encourage those in the room to
       respond positively to the effort.




                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                                             p.16
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
       identify the most appropriate elements of a corporate sector initiative, and strategies for
       enlisting support from key executives. In preparation for that session, White House and
       agency staff will brainstorm with some current and former Administration officials in
       corporate leadership.

        Youth: We are organizing a team of White House staff and representatives from national
       youth-oriented organizations to prepare a workplan intended for widespread endorsement
       and dissemination. (The outside collaborators will include USSA, Young Democrats,
       Young Republicans, the youth divisions of the NAACP, Urban League, La Raza and the
       Congress of Asian Pacific American Youth.) Tentatively, we think the plan's three major
       components will be: (i) a national campaign to educate the youth sector about the
       intricacies and history of race and racism; (ii) an initiative to improve race-related
       curriculum and teaching in grades K-16; and (iii) a mechanism to ensure youth sector
       involvement.

(b)    Options for an ongoing structure to carry out your work plan

While the work plan is not yet completed, we know that there will be some general components
which will require continuity and should compose the major responsibilities of the new entity:

~      Policy making (including research and data collection)
~      Outreach and leadership development (including technical assistance to communities)
~      Communication campaign (including an awards program)
~      Support for promising practices (such as a clearinghouse, conferences, grant funding)

The work plan lays out an ambitious agenda that will require the involvement of several players.
With such an extensive scope of work, a coordinating body for the federal sector, and for liaison
with non-federal actors is needed to ensure continued momentum and follow up from outside
efforts. Non-federal leaders engaged on the workplan will expect a central point of contact and
technical assistance.


Option A:      President's Council for One America

A1:    President>S Council fOr One Amen'ca Plus an External Advisory Committee
       The continuing effort could take a form similar to the Council for Environmental Quality
       or the Office of Science and Technology Policy. This arrangement would be short of
       the ONDCP model which has a large staff, a significant budget, and substantial operating




                                                                                             p.I7
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
      President (as Executive Director) with a small staff and a blue ribbon advisory committee.
        A council staff should include a policy component, which would work with existing
      White House policy offices and federal agencies to promote data collection and research
      and to develop and monitor policies to overcome disparities and eliminate discrimination.
        It would also have a communications component, which would help lead a public
      education campaign, support a promising practices clearinghouse, and conduct outreach
      to help improve race relations.

      Pros:          Location places the Presidency squarely behind racial reconciliation effort
                     Relatively stable structure
                     Staff appointed by you ensures White House control
                     Advisory committee offers opportunity for showcasing diverse leadership,
                      provides credibility in building partnerships

      Cons:          Location and staffing make the stakes high
                     Advisory committee requires support and nurturing; the familiar headaches

A2:   President's CounciJ for One America, No Advisory Committee
      This option would be the same as option AI but it would not include an Advisory
      Committee.
      Pros:         Staff would not be distracted by the day-to-day demands of managing an
                     Advisory Committee

      Cons:          Lacks the outside validation that an Advisory Committee can provide


Option B:      Dedicated Staff reporting to the Office of the Chief of Staff
               An Assistant to the President with a small staff, reporting to the Chief of Staffs
               office, could take responsibility for managing Administration efforts.

      Pros:          Closely linked to you and the White House
                     At the center of activity

      Cons:          Not a formal structure, may not be stable
                     May not be viewed publicly as a significant enough commitment


Option C:     Private Foundation Model




                                                  Automated Records Management System      p.18
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
      The structure could take the fonn of a private foundation, established at your urging and
      supported to varying degrees by the federal government, similar to the Points of Light
      Foundation. The goals of the foundation could include promoting research on issues of
      race, promoting a public education campaign to support racial reconciliation, and
      supporting community efforts to improve race relations. Such a foundation could perhaps
      best complement a separate policy-making effort within the federal goveOlment.

      Pros:       Serves as umbrella to coordinate several areas of activity
                  Independence
                  Ability to raise money

      Cons:       May not be viewed as closely connected to the White House
                  Requires someone's time and attention to pull together

C2:   Clinton Library Model
      This option is similar to the Foundation model above except that it would be an endeavor
      for you after your final term ends, possibly as part of the Clinton library. Staff could
      begin immediately to design the structure.

      Pros:       More time to put together the funding and structure
                  You will have more time to devote to it

      Cons:       Delays significant Presidential involvement for a few more years
                  May be partisan resistance to participating in activities because of close
                   alignment with this Administration




                                        V.   NEXT STEPS




Attachments:

      Current book outline.

                                         Automated Records Management System
                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                           p.19



        NEe memorandum on employment issues
        ???




                                          Automated Records Management System
                                          Hex-Dump Conversion



                                                                                p.20


