RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-SEP-1998 12:05:28.00

SUBJECT:   Reactions to Edley's paper

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP   [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Overall I think Chris' education section is ok, for as far as it goes.   I
have the following observations/reactions,based on my quick reading:

1.  As we insisted, Chris has coupled efforts to close the achievement gap
with efforts to closing the opportunity gap. As I. read his discussion, it
hit me that for message purposes we have to be clear about what it means
to close the achievement gap:  we should mean that race/ethnicity would no
longer be a significant predictor of achievement, though there would still
continue to be individual differences in achievement.  Often the rhetoric
about closing achievement gaps is misunderstood to mean that all kids will
now achieve at the same level--a goal that will be accomplished either by
holding down the performance of high achievers, or by lowering standards
and then ignoring performance that is above the standard.

2.  Chris has included the idea of an Education Bill of Rights.   Good
enough for now, though I assume there will be a lively debate over what
level of government, if any, funds and guarantees these rights.   In
addition, there are several things left off his list that we should insist
be added. In particular-- (1) after-school and summer-school programs to
provide kids who need it with extra help; and, (2) small classes with
qualified teachers.   There are several items on Chris' list that I have
concerns about.   (1) equitably funded schools and (2) the right to choose
racially and ethnically schools. With regard to equitable funding--what
makes funding important is what it buys--small classes, good teachers,
after-school programs, a well rounded instructional program, safe schools,
etc. If the bill of rights "guarantees' these opportunities, then I don't
think we also need to get into finance equity, and there are many down
sides for going down that road. with regard to choice--I think we want to
guarantee parents the right to choose good public schools.   Its ok if they
choose diverse, integrated schools, but we can do a whole lot more to
guarantee that there is a good supply of high quality schools from which
to choose, than we can guarantee schools that are racially integrated.   In
many places, geography and democraphics will simply make that impossible.

3.  Under his accountability section, Chris raises the issue of governance
and accountability.   I believe what he is getting at here is: if, in
order to guarantee finance equity or racially integrated schools we must
get rid of local districts and local school boards, we should do so.
While I find this an intriguing idea (I actually raised it in one of our
brainstorming sessions), it has the potential to create a needless
controversy that may not be central to accomplishing most of what we want
to get done.  It's ok with me if Chris wants to raise this in the memo,


but I think he should be far more explicit about what he has in mind.

4. The emphasis in the education section is overwhelmingly on K-12.   In
the main, this is right--we won't solve access to higher education
concerns unless we fix the schools that minority students attend.   That
notwithstanding, I think there needs to be somewhat greater attention to
higher education (particularly to show recognition of the affirmative
action issues) and to pre-school, because the kids we are most concerned
about need help starting as early as possible.
    "
