          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

          CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-SEP-1998 12:12:24.00

          SUBJECT:     State deal might be near

          TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          CC: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          HIGHLIGHTS

             1.Sources close to negotiations between the eight AGs, Philip Morris,
          and Lorillard suggest that
               a new AG settlement could be announced by end of next week. Terms are
          likely as follows --
               Payments at high end of expected $180-$200 billion range; marketing
          restrictions similar to
               Minnesota, with additional bans on sponsorships and cartoons;
          renegade multiplier of 3x with
               credits split by market share. The industry will not cede authority
          to the FDA or be subject to
               youth lookback penalties.
             2.0ur sense is that RJR and BAT 0) the latter which has been given the
          green light by a UK
               court to separate tobacco from non-tobacco 0) will continue their
          game of chicken with Philip
               Morris until after the state opt-in period closes, but ultimately
          embrace the new deal. RJRO,s
               Board and institutional shareholders are highly unlikely to bet the
          company on trials in
               Washington or Massachusetts to get a few market share points 0)
          particularly if Philip MorrisO,
               stock price is flying, and theirs isnO,t.
             3.RJR and B&W continue to insist that renegade credits be split up
          among those who lose
               share, rather than be split evenly by overall share. Philip Morris
          cannot accept a deal whereby
               those who lose share get rewarded with a rebate that could exacerbate
          any bout of pricing
               instability. It is one thing for renegade players with a collective
          1% share to have a $.40/pack
               price advantage; it is another for RJRO,s #2 Doral or B&WO,S #3 GPC
          brands to roll up
               company renegade credits to produce a $.40/pack discount.
             4.We believe that virtually all of the 46 states will opt in to the new
          PM/Lorillard agreement
               Having the industry split actually increases odds of all states
          opting in, since it allows the AGs
               to receive more than half their money from PM and Lorillard, and
          still talk tough in demanding
               that RJR & B&W comply with the public health provisions agreed to by


the others 0) or go to
      trial.
   S.Two other events should help bring all the states in: 1) The Idaho
ruling essentially gutted that
      stateD,s case, on the heels of the Indiana ruling dismissing
IndianaD,s AG claims last month; 2)
      We have heard talk that Republicans may try to clarify statutory
language to effectively
      disallow the federal government from recovering their share of
Medicaid damages received by
      the states.
   6.BATD,s spinoff should give investors renewed confidence that U.S.
courts would similarly
      reject challenges by plaintiffs that the distribution of corporate
assets represents a fraudulent
      conveyance by the tobacco companies. To succeed, plaintiffs must
show:

     Tobacco subsidiaries cannot satisfy all current and unmatured claims
0) which seems remote
     with an AG deal, in light of the growing paper trail by courts
dismissing personal injury class
     actions, and the industryD,s still perfect track record at trial;
     Assuming these claims succeed, tobacco subs cannot take pricing to
offset these claims, which
     is inconsistent with the record
     The parent is an "alter ego" of the sub, and therefore, the parentD,s
assets can be used to satisfy
     the judgments against the sub. This requires a showing of various
veil-piercing tests -- same
     Board, common use of facilities, sub has inadequate capital, etc.

INVESTMENT CONCLUSIONS

We reiterate outperform ratings on Philip Morris, RJR, and UST. We expect
tobacco stocks to
continue to outperform going into the new AG settlement (relative
performance since McCain bill
died 6/16: MO +26%, UST +17%, BATS +lS%, LTR +8%, RN +3%). This reflects
the sharp
favorable turn in the litigation landscape, and the general perception
that tobacco stocks, with their
non-cyclical businesses, depressed multiples, and rich relative yields,
will hold up well in this bear
market. We expect investors to bid up tobacco mUltiples in anticipation of
a new deal, and then, as
occurred last June, sell off once the deal is announced. This may be even
more true here, with a likely
30-day opt-in period for all states to decide whether to embrace the deal,
and the uncertainty
associated with RJR and B&W not being at the table. Key events: Resumption
of Philip MorrisD,
buyback and USTD,s recap (October); announcement of new proxy fight by
Icahn/LeBow against
RJR (end of October); Congressional elections (valuations increase if
Republicans pick up seats);
Maryland class action ruling (any day); Engle Phase I finding of fact
(year-end). We expect spinoffs
of corporate assets to begin by mid-next year, after the Florida Supreme
Court overturns Engle.
"..




      UST remains a prime takeout candidate by MO or LTR.

      ADDITIONAL DETAILS

         I.New deal next week. By the end of next week, we expect a new AG
      settlement to be
            announced along the lines of what we have articulated for two months
      ($180 - $200 billion in
            payments, Minnesota marketing restrictions, plus ban on sponsorships
      and cartoons, renegade
            multiplier of 3x on the share lost to discount players, no FDA or
      lookback provisions). We
            had hoped that RJR and B&W would be back at the table for the finale,
      but now expect they
            will wait until the close of the state opt-in period before choosing
      to end their game with Philip
            Morris to negotiate better terms on renegade credits and the upfront
      payment (see our piece
            dated 8/28/98 "The Renegade Rift: Why RJR and B&W Will Come Back To
      The Table.") .

           With tobacco stocks having risen smartly over the past month in
      anticipation of this deal, the
           real investment issue now is not getting the deal inked, but
      convincing at least 40 of the
           remaining 46 states to opt in to the deal, and getting RJR and B&W
      back to the table. With
           the ruling in Idaho effectively gutting that case this week, on the
      heels of the Indiana case being
           tossed out last month, many AGs who may have favored going to trial
      will now be forced
           politically to take the deal. Turning down potentially billions of
      dollars for their respective
           states, and going to trial despite what increasing look like weak
      cases, would put these AGO,s
           political careers at serious risk if their case ultimately gets
      thrown out or gutted in such a way
           that they cannot win.

           Specific terms of the new deal are likely to be as follows:

           Payments: Closer to high end of $180-$200 billion range over 25 years
      for remaining 46
           states; this would require an additional price increase of about
      $.35- $.40/pack over five
           years.

           Marketing restrictions: Minnesota terms (bans on billboards, branded
      merchandise and
           product placements in movies) plus concessions for brand
      sponsorships, and cartoons in ads.
           We doubt PM or Lorillard conceded human images in ads or outdoor
      signage at retail; the
           latter is important for gas and convenience chainsO, efforts to use
      premium cigarettes to draw
           traffic 0) which will help the Big 4 in their efforts to limit
      renegade share growth.
           Renegade provisions: The industry will get a credit for share lost to
      non-signatories, equal to
           the % share lost, multiplied by some factor, which we believe will be


     3x (example: Spp share
          loss to renegades, with a 3x multiplier, would reduce industry
     payments that year by 1S%, split
          by market share). The AGs may also agree on a best efforts basis to
     pursue claims against
          manufacturers who do not consent to the deal, and pursue actions
     against retailers who carry
          product made by non-signatories.
          MFN clauses: PM and Lorillard will get MFN clauses (most favored
     nations clauses) that if
          RJR and B&W negotiate more favorable terms, Philip Morris and BAT
     would get the same
          deal. Politically, it would be impossible for the AGs to give better
     terms to RJR/BAT, since
          they would then have to match those terms for MO/Lorillard. In
     addition, there are likely to be
          affiliate provisions in the agreement to prevent RJR or B&W from
     spinning off discount brands
          as separate companies, etc.
          Access, FDA, lookback penalties: Industry unlikely to give any
     concessions on these issues.

         I.Will Philip Morris and Lorillard sign even if RJR and B&W wonO,t? We
     believe that
           RJR and B&W misjudged their positions in walking away from the talks
     over how to split up
           renegade credits. Philip Morris cannot allow RJR, with a 24% share, a
     nd B&W with a 16%
           share, to arm themselves with a $.10- $.lS/pack corporate cost
     advantage (much higher if
           rolled up against a single brand) simply because they lose share in a
     given year. We believe
           RJR and B&W would use those funds to recoup their share losses --
     which might have
           occurred anyway 0) which would further disrupt pricing . We point out
     that Liggett and
           Commonwealth, with 2.2% of the total 3.0% renegade share, have always
     followed the Big
           40,s price increases. The other 0.8% share held by renegades is
     highly unlikely to change much
           no matter how aggressively the renegades price, given spotty broker
     distribution networks,
           weak balance sheets with the exception of Japan Tobacco, and the vast
     sums of program
           money given to the trade to encourage both wholesalers and retailers
     to push big 4 brands.
           We believe that the mindset of
           "letO,s-win-in-Washington-so-that-we-can-get-a-better-AG-deal-later"
     is short-sighted; the
           AGs certainly a~enOft going to negotiate a deal after they lose
     washington (late-December
           timing); but instead wait until after the Massachusetts trial, where
     they may have some
           leverage. Finally, we ponder this: Del Webb, who represents Philip
     Morris, was supposed to
           run the Washington trial for the industry. Two weeks before the
     trial, is RJR really willing to
           change quarterbacks in a trial that could result in a multi-billion
     dollar loss? \
        2.Tobacco stocks as defensive plays. While we expect continued
:r    '.-.

     improvement on the
          litigation front to drive litigation discounts down further,
     investors can also view Philip MorrisD,
          stock as a good hedge during this period of high market turbulence.
     On average, Philip Morris
          has outperformed the market by +13pp annualized during periods
     recognized as bear markets
          (market down at least 20% from peak). All tobacco stocks offer yields
     that add 2.S-6.0pp to
          their relative performance:


