RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-SEP-1998 17:12:04.00

SUBJECT:   REVISED LIST OF NEW IDEAS FOR TOMORROW'S MEETING

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]   )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]      )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BRING THIS TO TOMORROW'S MEETING.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D54]MAIL411452150.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504346050000010A020100000002050000005739010000020000542C5F5F5EE32557997C20
EAC6D573F7EC8F181BOD89C312CBDEABB9D00889D97AFB894C8FE327B91A050F616F53164068F3
C7FC08F8974C9989777DC9385E37BF4FCD73C58066D90975986150CB1929511760F5951104B841


MEMORANDUM FOR BRUCE REED
               ELENA KAGAN

FROM:                    Domestic Policy Council Staff

SUBJECT:                 Compilation of Preliminary New Ideas



CHILDREN AND FAMILLIES

1. Child Care. While this is not a new idea, we must maintain our support for our child
care initiative in order to have credibility on the rest of a new "families first" agenda.

2. Paid Parental Leave. Funding for paid-parental leave for the purpose of looking after a
newborn baby, or a newly-adopted child for 12 weeks (although we may reduce the length
of time, depending on costs). A leave initiative may be targeted to families whose incomes
are below a certain level.

3. Home Visitation. Funding for programs that counsel and support parents in the
parenting process. These programs are often conducted by trained professionals, such as
nurses and counselors, and they tend to dramatically decrease levels of abuse, which in
turn decreases rates of delinquency and crime amongst children and youth.

4. Child Welfare. Additional funding and improvements of independent living. (Specifics to
follow.)

5. Child Tax Credit. Double the Child Tax Credit, from $500 per child to $1000, for
parents of children aged 0 to three.

6. Home Office Tax Deduction. Expand the allowable expenses for those who work out of
their home.

7. Flex-Time. Offer tax incentives for companies that offer flexible work hours for their
employees, compressed work weeks, part-time work with benefits, job sharing, career
sequencing, and extended parental leave.

8. After-School Programs. Support after-school programs in both school-based and
non-school-based settings, with a priority to those programs that are tailored to work
hours.


                                              1             Automated Records M
                                                            H                  anagement System
                                                             eX-Dump Conversion




     CIVIL RIGHTS

       1. Enhance the CRS program at Justice. The Community Relations Service at Justice has
     been a significant force in cooling racial tensions in communities all over the country. Since the
     1980s, their budget has been decimated. This initiative could (1) enhance CRS's ability to
     provide mediation services to resolve community civil rights concerns as an alternative to
     litigation; and (2) provide CRS conflict resolution training and technical assistance to
     communities. The CRS is very popular with the AG and she often talks of wanting it
     strengthened.

     2. Inter-Agency Task force on Discrimination. This initiative would create an inter-agency
     task force (headed by the Civil Rights Division at Justice) to expand research on the extent of
     racial discrimination in the country. The research would focus on developing uniform testing
     protocols in housing, employment, and access to capital and then using these tools to asses the
     nature and extent of discrimination in these areas. This effort could be linked to agency
     compliance and/or enforcement work.

     3. Improve Civil Rights Information Sharing. This proposal would provide funds to establish
     and maintain a system that links the data bases of agencies with civil rights enforcement
     responsibilities -- thus allowing, for example, OCR at Education to have better access to work
     being done by the Education Section at Civil Rights.

     4. Becoming an American. A national effort to focus on easing the transition to the U.S. for
     new immigrants. We could provide grants to community-based organizations that fund English
     and civics classes for new immigrants. Also, we could encourage the development of programs
     that provide practical transition-type help to new immigrants -- such as understanding the public
     education system; understanding the housing system, etc. According to the INS, there is a bit of
     this being done on the community level, but they do not fund any of it. Also, some of the
     education bits are done by the Dept. of Ed. (adult education and/or literacy), but not in a
     coordinated way. HHS funds some transition work for refugees. This general idea was first
     talked about by the Jordan Commission.

     5. Sweat-Shop Initiative. Expand enforcement against labor abuses in "sweatshops" and on
     farms that employ migrant farm laborers. Many of the wage & hour laws in place to protect
     low-wage workers are not adequately enforced by the Department of Labor, in part because of
     dramatic reduction in funding for these efforts during the 1980s. These workplaces often serve

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                     2
                                                             Hex-Dwnp Conversion
affect Latinos and Asians.

6. Equal Pay. A program that could be run by the EEOC and DOL to increase outreach
to businesses to educate them about the legal requirements for paying equal wages, provide
technical assistance, improve training for EEOC employees and resources for increases in
enforcement capabilities.


COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT

1. Access To Capital For All Americans.

       -CDFI Tax Credit. In 1996, we proposed a tax credit for investors in CDFIs. We
       could re-propose this $100 million non-refundable tax credit. The maximum amount of
       credit allocable to a particular investment would be 25 percent of the amount invested.

       - Voluntary CRA. Launch a bully pulpit effort to encourage non-bank financial
       institutions   to develop and implement principles for community investment.

       -Micro-Enterprise. Provide authorization and funding for CDFI Fund to provide
       technical assistance to micro enterprise organizations and micro-entrepreneurs (PRIME
       Act, Kennedy-Domenici).
       -Secondary Market. Develop coordinated administration initiative to take first steps
       towards secondary market for community development loans, including data collection,
       education, standardization, regulatory review, and the creation of a loan loss reserve fund
       to back pools of community development loans pooled and sold by the private sector.

       -Fair Lending.  Continue to push the Fed to permit collection of data on race and
       income of small business borrowers; consider legislation if this fails.

       -Capital Access Programs. Push to give the CDFI Fund authorization to launch small
       business capital enhancement program to back state-run loan loss reserve funds that
       permit banks to make more difficult small business loans.

2. Sustainable Development.

       -Environmental Activity Bonds. In response to the growing needs of urban areas, an
       environmental bond would help cities meet the environmental goals set by the Clinton
       Administration. EPA has identified three areas which would be candidates eligible to
       receive funding: brownfields, drinking water, urban river/waterfront cleanup, and the

                                                3
                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
infrastructure to meet the requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act) and brownfields
are two areas that cities continue to seek assistance for financing. Our preference is to be
more inclusive and allow municipalities increased flexibility to identify their priorities.
However, there should be attention paid to how this financing would intersect with other
Administration initiatives like the Clean Water Action Plan, Drinking Water Revolving
Loan Fund, and TEA-21.

- Urban River Corridors and Wetlands Restoration Projects. EP A proposes urban river
corridor and wetlands restoration efforts tailored to improve the human health and
economic opportunities in urban communities. To date, EPA has made small grants to
a number of cities and municipalities for these types of projects. With additional grants
to local communities, the Agency could provide the necessary funding for projects to
improve community water resources. These projects would provide employment
opportunities for residents, benefit the economic welfare and technical competence of local
residents, and empower the community to build for a better future. Restored areas can
serve to attract and sustain business as well as provide outlets for recreation.

-Community Preference and Visualization Tools.      Building the social capital necessary to
change transportation and land-use policies to create more livable communities also
requires tools that the average citizen can use to understand the implications of major
policy choices. EPA proposed to act as a catalyst in the development and use of such
innovative decision making tools. The types of tools would include: 1) Community
Preference Surveys, which show communities pictures of different neighborhood types,
and help the community reach a consensus about the types of development that are
desirable; 2) simulation tools, which would get a community "development ready" or
help a community experiment with alternatives that have been proposed; and 3) new
software, accessible to the public as well as urban planners, to view and evaluate
alternative urban designs for any community.

-Asthma Initiatives. Through better implementation and new investments, EPA believes
the Federal government can take action that will show immediate and long term results to
reduce asthma rates among children.

-Air Quality Credits.     EPA proposes to provide incentives to transportation planning by
developing protocols for potential air quality credits toward state attainment plans for
locally-initiated strategies and projects that create less auto-dependent communities.
Similarly, the Agency proposes to create the next generation of the Clean Air Brownfields
Partnership Pilot by continuing and expanding its ongoing efforts to link air quality goals
and brownfields/infill redevelopment. After 2000, EPA proposes to partner with cities


                                          4
                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
       work with the city, state, and developer to come up with a project design that maximizes
       air quality benefits, and allow credit for these activities under the State Implementation
       Plan.

3. Job Creation in Distressed Communities.

       -Local Infra structural Improvement and Economic Revitalization Fund.      Emil forwarded
       this idea to establish a Federal grant program to fund local Infra structural improvements.
         This would spark revitalization of declining or stagnant low-income areas by providing
       funds to upgrade local infrastructure. These Federal dollars could leverage State, local,
       and private funds for such Infra structural efforts.

       -Community Revitalization Tax Credit. LISC proposes a Community Revitalization Tax
       Credit (CRTC) --similar to the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit --to help stimulate
       private-sector investment in commercial property in under served neighborhoods.

       -Community Development Corporation Tax Credit. In 1993, we put in place a
       demonstration tax credit for investors in 20 CDCs. According to this report for Bruce
       Katz' shop at Brookings, this program has been effective. We could propose expanding
       this CDC tax credit to more areas. The author of this report also proposes some
       changes to make the tax credit more effective.

       -Expand and Rationalize Employer-Side Tax Incentives. This includes EZs, Welfare to
       Work, WOTC, DC Jobs Credit.

       - Working Ventures Fund     Fund one or more national non-profits to fund, evaluate, share
       best practices, develop networks, and link non-profits to their business community, in the
       job training and placement field, as LISC and Enterprise do in the housing

       -Community Empowerment Fund          a) Include targeting for welfare to work projects; b)
       allow links to venture capital focused on minority-owned or small business in distressed
       areas; c) eliminate mandatory pledge of CDBG dollars for CEF loans.

       -Metro Jobs/Community Development Corporation (CDC) Links. Would target job-poor
       but CDC-served central-city neighborhoods to create or strengthen a welfare-to-work
       infrastructure that is place-based but people-focused and regional in orientation (where
       the jobs are). Would build on HUD's Bridges to Work and complement DOL and
       HHS efforts, focusing on concentrations of assisted housing run by CBOs.



                                                5
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

       eAsset Development for Section 8 Voucher Recipients. Currently, an individual still sees
       the size of their subsidy reduced for each extra dollar he/she earns. This new idea from
       Liebman and Orszag would roll-over any savings --or a part of the savings --from an
       individual earning more money into an Individual Development Account (IDA). That
       is, if the size of a person's Section 8 voucher is reduced by about 30 cents for each extra
       dollar he/she earns, we could put this savings --up to 30 cents --in an IDA. We could
       also the capabilities created by EFT '99 to electronically transfer money to efficiently
       establish IDAs for more Americans.

       eBrownfields Meets Community Development. Under this proposal, we would push banks
       to invest in brownfields as part of their CRA commitments.


5. Affordable Housing.

       eElderly Housing Initiative. 1) Housing modernization grants to existing elderly housing
       projects for modernization, physical redesign, and/or conversion to assisted living; 2)
       Expanded and more flexible service coordinator grants to meet needs of increasingly frail
       population in public and assisted housing; 3) authority for PHAs to use vouchers for the
       housing component of assisted living costs.

       eRegional Affordable Housing Initiative. Targeting regions with severe jobs-housing
       imbalance and established partnerships for regional collaboration, HUD would provide
       grants and loan guarantees to support planning, regulatory streamlining across
       jurisdictions, and development.

       e   Vouchers.   An expanded request will focus on incrementals, welfare to work, and
       homeless.

6. Promoting Homeownership In Distressed Communities.

       eLow-Income Homeownership Tax Credit. Self-Help --a community group in North
       Carolina --proposes a tax credit for investors who provide second mortgages to
       low-income families. This could significantly reduce the barriers to homeowners hip
       among low-income families, who do not really benefit from the home mortgage interest
       deduction.

       eIncrease Allocation ofMortgage Revenue Bonds. Each state receives a supply of

                                                  6
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
       homeowners and help develop affordable rental housing. There are currently 53
       co-sponsors of legislation in the Senate and 316 co-sponsors of legislation in the House to
       increase the allocation of mortgage revenue bonds by slightly more than 50 percent and
       then index it to the rate of inflation.

       eExpand Use ofMortgage Credit Certificates. Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCCs) are
       credits against federal income tax equal to between 10 and 50 percent of mortgage interest
       (to a limit of $2,000 per homeowner) issued by state governments. MCCs count
       against state's ability to issue mortgage revenue bonds. We could propose to expand the
       MCC program to allow the limit to be $4,000 for homeowners in EZs or ECs. We
       could also propose allowing states to not have to count MCCs against their mortgage
       revenue bond base.

       eFirst-Time Homebuyer Tax Credit. The 1997 tax law put in place a $5,000 tax credit for
       first-time homebuyers in the District of Columbia. To boost homeowners hip in
       Empowerment Zones, we could propose allowing any first-time homebuyer in an EZ to
       take advantage of this tax provision.


       eHistoric Homeownership Assistance Tax Credit. The National Trust for Historic
       Preservation proposes a 20-percent tax credit to homeowners who rehabilitate or purchase
       a newly rehabilitated historic home and occupy it as a principal residence.

       eHomeownership Vouchers. Already authorized, would apply rental subsidies to
       mortgage-related expenses for first-time homebuyers who were Section 8 tenants.


EDUCATION

1. Class Size Reduction. Reintroduce President's proposal to reduce class size in grades
1-3 to an average of 18. Needs to be funded on the mandatory side. If necessary, we
could combine this with a teacher quality/recruitment initiative, so that funds in the early
years of the program are devoted to (1) incentives for people to enter teaching and/or (2)
teacher training and professional development.

2. School Modernization. We've tried this on the mandatory side and we've tried this on
the tax side. Assuming we don't get it this year, we've got to try again next year.

3. School Discipline/Safety. We are working on an overhaul of the Safe and Drug Free
Schools Program, that will: (1) focus the program on comprehensive, proven approaches


                                               7
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            HeX-Dump Conversion
with the greatest needs; and, (3) improve data collection and reporting, including school
report cards on safety/discipline issues. Because the program currently spreads (small
amounts of) funds around to almost all school, and because of its initial emphasis on
keeping schools drug-free, the politics of this program will probably require that any shift
in emphasis on greater targeting will require additional resources.

4. Teacher Supply and Quality. Here are three initial ideas for improving teacher
quality. The first two came out of our initial discussions on the President's race report.
We can decide down the road whether to keep them focused on high poverty schools, or
make them more universal. We can also break out particular pieces of them into separate
initiatives if we want to:

          . Make sure there are qualified teachers in high poverty schools. First,
          encourage and support state and local efforts to improve the preparation,
          certification, recruitment, selection, induction, retention, evaluation, reward and
          dismissal of teachers overall. Support necessary R&D on critical components of
          an upgraded system, such assessing teacher competence in the classroom.
          Second, work to end the practice of disproportionately placing and keeping
          unqualified teachers in high poverty schools. Require states to require
          prospective teacher to pass basic skills/subject matter tests (and help them
          develop more demanding assessments) in order to be licensed Prohibit school
          districts receiving Title 1 funds from staffing Title 1 funded classes (what about
          schoolwides???) with unqualified teachers, and bar those without an effective
          system for teacher evaluation (including removal of incompetent teachers) from
          receiving Federal (or just Title 1) funds. Require K-4 teachers in Title 1 schools
          to successfully complete training in teaching reading, and fund the training.
          Third, help attract and retain the best teachers for high poverty schools. Fund
          induction and continuing professional development programs in high poverty
          schools. Provide incentives for Board-certified teachers to teach in high poverty
          schools .

          . Recruit More Minority Teachers. Many believe that a major factor
          influencing children's success in education is role models. Enhance current
          recruitment programs with effective incentives to attract more minorities to the
          teaching profession. Minority teachers, administrators, and school personnel
          serve as role models for minority students and can provide an important link
          between schools and parents.

          eEstablish subject-specific teacher/administrator training
          institutes/academies/centers in every state. There are crying needs to train
          existing teachers in key subject areas, such as reading, technology use,
          math/science and other academic subject. We should establish subject specific


                                              8           Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
       The idea is to create a place, probably at a university, that has the
       subject-matter capacity and can work with school systems to develop and
       implement a strategy for ensuring that every teacher who needs it gets high
       quality, intensive and ongoing training in the subject and how to teach it. This
       could either substitute for or complement the current teacher training program
       (Eisenhower Professional Development Program), which provides funds to states
       and school districts on a formula basis, with broad discretion on how the funds
       can be used for professional development. We could also establish training
       centers for principals and other school leaders .

       . Continuing the Troops to Teachers (TTT) program (due to phase out in Oct
       1999). TTT provides stipends to encourage retired military personnel to teach
       and school districts to hire and train them. TTT attracts more minorities and
       men into the teaching profession than are traditionally represented, they have
       background in understaffed subjects such as math and science, and are more
       willing to teach in inner-city classrooms.

5. Recruiting and Training Principals. Most states and communities lack good
strategies for recruiting and preparing individuals with the knowledge and skills to provide
the kind ofleadership and management schools need right now. We could propose a
competitive demonstration program to provide focus, leadership and effective models for the
field. This would not be a big-ticket item.

6. UrbanlRural Initiative. This could take two forms. One would be some version of
Education Opportunity Zones--a competitive grants program that rewards performance and
requires accountability. A second would be to create local performance partnerships, in
which local communities agree to create schools that are safe, have high standards and
qualified teachers, after-school programs, tutors and other forms of extra help for kids,
technology, etc. The districts would be responsible for creating schools with these
opportunities, and would be accountable for improving achievement across the board
(perhaps as measured against national standards). In return, the districts would (1) be able to
combine funds from relevant ED and other programs, so they can figure out the best way to
provide the learning opportunities; (2) get extra funding over and above the funding from the
existing categorical programs; and (3) gain or lose additional funding based on performance
(with some floor established to minimize the risk for districts).

7. Choice Demonstration Program. Establish a demonstration program to challenge
states and school districts/cities to expand the range of high quality schools students and
families can choose among, thereby enabling students in low performing schools to move to
better ones. A variety of approaches should be encouraged, including:

       . Community College Enrollment. High school students should be permitted to


                                            9                Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
      step could provide inner city students with access to more qualified teachers, because
      most community colleges have faculty with subject matter expertise (whereas urban
      high schools often have teachers teaching out of field). It could also help boost
      minority enrollment in college. [see if this can build on existing tech-prep programs,
      or other articulation agreements.]

      . Contract School System. Transform urban school systems from bureaucracies
      which operate large numbers of schools into systems in which the local governing
      body contracts out the operation of each school--to teachers, nonprofits, school
      management firms, etc. In effect every school becomes a charter school, with a
      distinct mission, control over its own staffing and budget, and accountable for results.
       The local school board is responsible for selecting the schools, identifying new types
      of schools that might be needed and soliciting proposals to operate the school,
      monitoring the performance of each school and holding it accountable. Under this
      approach, all schools would eventually be schools ofchoice.[see Paul Hill's work for
      background on this]

      . Schools located at large employers. Encourage large employers to provide
      facilities on site for schools for children of their own employees, while the school
      district provides the teachers, curriculum, instructional materials, etc. Dade County's
      SateJlite Learning Centers provide the model for this approach. Dade's experience
      shows that these schools can (1) be more diverse than other schools, because work
      sites are more diverse than residential neighborhoods (2) save the school districts the
      cost of new facilities (3) save employers costs associated with employee turnover and
      (4) increase parental involvement in the schools.

      -Expanding choice through smaller, schools-within-schools. Transform large,
      impersonal schools into smaller schools-within-schools that would dramatically
      expand choices within public education for families without requiring students
      to leave their neighborhoods. Many parents want more choice in education but
      don't want to send their children to school far from home. This proposal would
      address that need and enable many more students to get the personalized
      learning attention that so many families want; it also may reduce discipline and
      violence problems. A grants program could support networks of schools or
      school districts to plan and implement this concept and provide information and
      counseling to help students and their families make good choices. This proposal
      could be linked or combined with the "contract" schools concept by creating a
      competitive process to award contracts to manage each school-within-a-school to
      teachers, non-profits, charter schools, etc.

8. English Language Acquisition. As part of the planned overhaul of the Bilingual
Education Program, we should consider a number of initiatives:


                                               10
                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
       services. English language competency is the key to success in schooling and the
       economy. ESL and similar services should be made universally available to all
       students who need them. Federal funding can provide matching grants to
       States to do this. The requirement--including funding and accountability--for
       serving LEP kids and helping them become competent in English within 3 years
       should be built into the Title 1 program. Other programs, such as after-school
       and technology, should also be designed so that in schools with significant
       numbers of LEP kids, they are also focused on helping kids learn English within
       3 years.

        Support English Plus. In addition to ensuring that all LEP students learn
       English, we should promote foreign language learning, starting in the early
       grades, for student's whose native language is English. The objective is to
       dramatically increase the number of students who leave school fluent in two or
       more languages, regardless of their native language.

        Support demonstrations of, and if effective greatly expand "Newcomer High
       Schools" for recently arrived immigrant students. Many school districts are
       facing an increasing number of secondary immigrant students who have low
       level English or native language skills, and in many cases, have had limited
       formal education in their native countries. In order to prevent these students
       from dropping out (and these children are a significant factor in the 40%
       Hispanic drop-out rate), these students must learn English, take the required
       content courses and catch up to their U.S. peers. Some district have developed
       Newcomer programs --either a separate school or a school-within-a-school.
       These programs typically educate students for a limited period of time (most for
       less than two years) before enrolling them in their home schools. Three such
       schools are 4-year high schools. The programs reach beyond the students
       themselves, providing classes to orient parents to the U.S. and 63% offer adult
       ESL classes. There are currently 75 such programs in 18 States and the Center
       for Applied Linguistics has sponsored an evaluation of their effectiveness.

9. Quality pre-school education. We can propose an initiative to make quality
pre-school universally available, or at least universally available for poor kids. There
should be two key components to this. One is to provide a number of funding streams
to pay for it. Head Start should be the base, though we should also look at ways in
which Title 1 could playa larger role. Second, we should provide incentives to both
preschools and school districts that receive federal funds, to work together to help
ensure that the preschools programs are focused on helping kids get ready for school,
by requiring the schools to reach out to preschools and let them know what they expect
kids to know and be able to do when they come to kindergarten, and by giving the


                                             11              Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

10. Federal Matching Funds for AP courses and for AP and SAT/ACT Preparation.
The President has made universal access to two years of higher education a priority,
and has created ways to alleviate the financial hurdles. A logical next step in
improving the quality of access is to make all students more competitive by closing the
gaps in advanced course availability as well as SAT and ACT test scores. The Federal
government could establish funding matching mechanisms to encourage states to
improve access to AP courses and preparation for AP tests in low-income schools; in
areas where AP courses are not available, funds could be used for partnerships with
community colleges that offer similar courses. Similarly, matched funds could be used
to do one of a number of things for SAT/ACT preparation: pay for low-income youth to
attend prep courses (e.g., Kaplan; Princeton Review); fund poor school districts to set
up their own test prep programs; as in America Reads, waive the federal match for
Work Study students who help prepare disadvantaged students for the tests.

11.  'High Hopes" for Adults. While the President has made enormous progress in
making available resources for higher education for people of all ages, the primary
focus of Administration informational campaigns and initiatives like High Hopes have
been to encourage young people to go to college. A new initiative could combine two
efforts. First, the Administration could launch an informational campaign
encouraging adults to go back to school and inform them of new resources available to
help, including Lifetime Learning and Hope Scholarship Tax Credits, Individual
Training Accounts under the new Workforce Investment Act, and Pell Grants (which
apparently few realize can be used for part-time students). Second, a new "High
Hopes" grants program targeted at adults, partly focused on encouraging minorities
and women to go back to school, could support local partnerships of business,
community colleges, labor unions, one-stop centers and others to provide the
information and counseling needed to encourage and assist adults to enroll in courses
and programs that will help them succeed in their local job market.

12. Encourage High Schools to OfferlRequire Service Learning. We should
consider expanding the service learning initiative (Learn and Serve) to encourage more
school districts to incorporate service into their education programs. The service
learning program could be expanded to provide a stronger infrastructure, e.g., service
coordinators for high schools, in order to make the service experience both more
rewarding and educational for students.




HEALTH

                                                       Automated Records M
                                            12         Hex D             . anagement System
                                                          - ump Conversion

       Long-term care tax credit. Along with the lack of coverage of prescription
      drugs, the poor coverage of long-term care represents a major cost burden for
      the elderly and their families. Long-term care costs account for nearly half of
      all out-of-pocket health expenditures for Medicare beneficiaries. This proposal
      would give people with two or more limitations in activities of daily living (ADL)
      or their care givers a tax credit of $500 (or more, if affordable) to help pay for
      formal or informal long-term care. This initiative would be coupled with other
      long-term care policies (e.g., offering private long-term care insurance offering
      to Federal employees). (Cost: About $4 billion over         5 years, offset by closing
      some tax loopholes, and would help about 3.4 million people).

       Offering private long-term care insurance to Federal employees. Since
      expanding Federal programs alone cannot address the next century's long-term
      care needs, the Federal government --as the nation's largest employer --could
      illustrate that a model employer should promote high-quality private long-term
      care insurance policies to its employees. Under this proposal, OPM would offer
      its employees the choice of buying differing types of high quality policies and use
      its market leverage to extract better prices for these policies. There would be no
      Federal contribution for this coverage. (Cost: Small administrative costs; OPM
      estimates about 300,000 participants).

       Tax credit for work-related impairment expenses for people with disabilities.
      Almost 75 percent of people with significant disabilities are unemployed; many
      of those within the popUlation cite the cost of employment support
      services/devices, as well as the potential to lose Medicaid or Medicare coverage,
      as the primary barriers to seeking and keeping employment. This proposal,
      strongly advocated by your Task Force on Employment of Adults with
      Disabilities, would give a 50 percent tax credit, up to $5,000, for
      impairment-related work expenses. It could be a stand alone proposal in the
      budget or packaged as a long-term care initiative if we decide to defer
      announcing the long-term care tax credit. (Cost: About $500 million over 5
      years, offset by closing tax loopholes, and would help about 300,000 people).

      텻ew Family Care giver "One-Stop-Shop" Support Program. About 50 million
      people provide some type of long-term care to family and friends. Families who
      have a relative who develops long-term care needs often do not know how to
      provide such care and where to turn for help. This proposal would give grants
      from the Administration on Aging to states to provide for a "one-stop-shop"
      access point to assist families who care for elderly relatives with 2 or more ADL
      limitations and/or severe cognitive impairment. This assistance would include


                                             13          Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
for caregivers. (Cost: About $500 -750 million over 5 years).

 Adding prescription drug coverage to Medicare (new policy). The lack of
coverage for prescription drugs in Medicare is widely believed to be its most
glaring shortcoming. Recognizing the medical community's reliance on
prescriptions for the provision of much of the care provided to Americans,
virtually every private health plan for the under-65 population has a drug
benefit. Medicare's lack of coverage is largely responsible for the fact that drug
costs are the highest out-of-pocket cost for three out of four elderly. This burden
will only become more acute in the next century as the vast majority of advances
in health care interventions will be pharmacologically-based. Responding to
this fact, Republicans and Democrats on the Medicare Commission, as well as
almost every health care policy expert, are consistently stating that reforming
Medicare without addressing the prescription drug coverage issue would be a
mistake. We are developing a wide variety of options, including a means-tested
option, a managed care benefit only approach, and a traditional benefit for all
beneficiaries. If desirable, a proposal could be included in the budget or
coordinated with the March release of the Medicare Commission's
recommendations. (Cost: Varies significantly depending on proposal, but could
be $1 -20 billion a year; assumed offset would be Medicare savings, which might
more easily be achieved in context of a broader reform proposal).

 Cancer clinical trials demonstration (FY 1999 budget; not passed). Less than
three percent of cancer patients participate in clinical trials. Moreover,
Americans over the age of 65 make up half of all cancer patients, and are 10
times more likely to get cancer than younger Americans. This proposed
three-year demonstration, extremely popular with the cancer patient advocacy
community, would cover the patient care costs associated with certain
high-quality clinical trials. (Cost: $750 million over 3 years).

 Redesigning and increasing enrollment in Medicare's premium assistance
program (extension of July executive action and new policy). Over 3 million
low-income Medicare beneficiaries are eligible but do not receive Medicaid
coverage of their Medicare premiums and cost sharing. Many more may not
get enough assistance through the new, BBA provision that is supposed to help
higher income beneficiaries. We are developing a range of proposals that build
on the President's actions in this area to better utilize Social Security Offices to
educate beneficiaries about this program, to reduce administrative complexity
for states and to give them incentives to engage in more aggressive outreach
efforts. (Costs vary depending on policies; probably about $500 million to $2
billion over 5 years).



                                       14          Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

      - Providing new coverage options for people ages 55 to 65 (FY 1999 budget; not
      passed). Americans ages 55 to 65 have a greater risk of becoming sick; have a
      weakened connection to work-based health insurance, and face high premiums
      in the individual insurance market. This three-part initiative would: (1) allow
      Americans ages 62 to 65 to buy into Medicare, through a premium designed so
      that this policy is self-financed;      (2) offer a similar Medicare buy-in to
      displaced workers ages 55 and over who have involuntarily lost their jobs and
      health care coverage; and (3) give retirees 55 and over whose retiree health
      benefits have been ended access to their former employers' health insurance. A
      proposal such as this would be minimally necessary for any serious
      consideration of proposals to raise Medicare's eligibility age. (Cost: About
      $1.5 billion over 5 years, which would assist about 300,000 people).

      -Health coverage for the temporarily unemployed (FY 1997 and 1998 budgets;
      not passed). Because most health insurance is employment based, job changes
      put families at risk of losing their health care coverage. Many families do not
      have access to affordable health insurance when they are between jobs because
      they work for firms that do not offer continuation coverage or cannot afford
      individual insurance. The proposal would provide temporary premium
      assistance for up to six months for workers between jobs who previously had
      health insurance through their employer, are in between jobs, and may not be
      able to pay the full cost of coverage on their own. (Costs depend on whether it
      is done as a demo (about $2.5 billion over 5 years, which would help about
      600,000 people) or nationwide (about $10 billion over 5 years, which would cover
      about 1.4 million persons.

      - Children's health insurance outreach (FY 1999 budget; not passed and new
      policy). By the first anniversary of CHIP, we expect about 45 states to have
      CHIP plans approved. These new expansions have great potential to help
      uninsured children, but not if families do not know or understand the need for
      insurance. Moreover, over 4 million uninsured children are eligible for
      Medicaid today. Last year's budget included several policies to promote
      outreach, including allowing states to temporarily enrolling uninsured children
      in Medicaid through child care referral centers, schools, etc; and allowing States
      to access extra Federal funds for children's outreach campaigns. An additional
      proposal is to pay for a nationwide toll-free number that connects families with
      state eligibility workers. NGA is sponsoring this line for one year only; such a
      line is essential for the nationwide media campaign that we are planning to
      launch in January with the NGA and America's Promise (Colin Powell's group).


                                            15
                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

        Parents of children on CHIP (new policy). Since children who are uninsured
       usually have parents who are uninsured, an easy way to target uninsured adults
       is to extend eligibility for Medicaid or CHIP to parents of children covered by
       these programs. This has been done successfully in some states, through
       Medicaid 1115 waivers, and would be a logical next step to covering low-income
       adults. (Cost: Depends on the proposal and assumed take-up rates by the
       states) .

       Optional state coverage expansion through eligibility simplification (new
      policy). In the wake of welfare reform, Medicaid eligibility rules have become
      even more complex since states must cover people who would have been eligible
      for AFDC under the old rules. Additionally, Medicaid law allows states to
      cover parents but not adults without children --even if they are very poor. This
      proposal would allow states to opt for a pure poverty standard for Medicaid
      eligibility for all people (like we do for children) rather than the old categorical
      eligibility categories. Not only would such an approach simplify the Medicaid
      program for families and states; it would provide an opportunity for significant
      coverage expansion. While any change in Medicaid almost always raises
      concerns amongst some advocates, this proposal would be strongly supported by
      the Governors and advocates such as the Center for Budget and Policy
      Priorities. (Cost: Depends on the proposal and projected coverage expansion
      take-up rates) .
       Voluntary purchasing cooperatives (FY 1997, 1998, and 1999 budgets; not
      passed). Workers in small firms are most likely to be uninsured; over a quarter
      of workers in firms with fewer than 10 employees lack health insurance
      -almost twice the nationwide average. This results in large part because
      administrative costs are higher and that small businesses pay more for the same
      benefits as larger firms. This proposal would provide seed money for states to
      establish voluntary purchasing cooperatives. These cooperatives would allow
      small employers to pool their purchasing power to try to negotiate better rates
      for their employees. (Cost: about $100 million over 5 years).

3. Increase the Indian Health Service budget. In order to reach more of the targeted
population, we should provide a significant increase to the IHS budget in order to
address areas such as substance abuse, elder health care, injury prevention, domestic
violence and child abuse, and sanitation facilities.


HOMELESS

1. Homeless Veterans. The National Coalition of Homeless Veterans estimates that there


                                             16       Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
Department of Veterans Affairs, an approximately $60 million increase in funding
would constitute the single largest investment into breaking the cycle of homelessness
among veterans. This proposal would seek to increase residential alternatives,
community-based contracted care, job preparation activities, stand down activities
(community-sponsored events that conduct one-stop service delivery programs for
homeless veterans), the distribution of clothing, and long-term housing. The VA
estimates that this proposal would positively impact approximately 100,000 to 150,000
veterans annually.

2. Allow VA to sell surplus property with 10 percent of proceeds going to homeless
veterans. OMB proposes to amend the Property Act of 1949 to create a 5-year pilot
project for the VA to sell off property with 10 percent of the proceeds going to local
homeless ness projects under the McKinney Act (with this 10 percent being earmarked
for homeless veterans) and the other 90 percent going to the VA for capital funds
(buildings, equipment, infrastructure, but not staft). Currently, the way the law
works is that all the proceeds from surplus property goes to homelessness, but this has
not provided an incentive to the agencies to sell property because they do not get to
keep any of the proceeds. OMB states that since 1989, only one piece of property has
been sold under this provision. OMB will be circulating their proposal within a
couple of weeks. OMB would propose to permit VA to sell 25 pieces of property, but
does not have a cost estimate yet.

3. Homelessness Demonstration Project Modeled after T ANF. Funds could be set aside
in the FY2000 budget to create a demonstration project so that one state, region, or
locality could try to move persons from homelessness to self-sufficiency. The
demonstration project should set up performance goals similar to T ANF so that there is
a measure of how many persons have been made self-sufficient. There could be a
performance bonus for the demonstration project if the goal of the project is met.

4. Medicaid Outreach Project for Homelessness. A Medicaid outreach project could be
set up, similar to the CHIP outreach project, that would reach out and cover homeless
persons. We should develop a cost estimate to determine that, over time, dollars would
be saved if persons are treated under Medicaid rather than on an as-needed basis in
emergency rooms and clinics. This idea could be expanded to reach out to more than
simply the homeless population to include all groups who are Medicaid-eligible.

CONSUMERS

1. Consumer Bill of Rights.   A consumer bill of rights could address a number of areas
such as enforcement, notice to consumers, and dissemination of information. We
could announce this bill of rights as a package, but then pull out separate pieces for
separate events like we do in the Patients' Bill of Rights area. We could include a


                                            17        Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

       - Auto Insurance Fraud. Auto insurance fraud is a $13 billion-a-year problem
       in America. We could propose significant funding for a Justice Department
       anti-auto insurance fraud. Since an estimated 13 percent of auto-insurance
       premiums go to pay for fraud, we could claim that this effort will help drive
       down auto-insurance premiums.

       - Slamming/Cramming. Cramming, in which con artists add bogus charges to
       consumers' telephone bills, and slamming, the unwanted switching of
       long-distance telephone service from one carrier to another, and are the top two
       respective complaints reported to the National Fraud Information Center in
       1998. In 1997, the FCC received more than 20,000 complaints from customers
       who were slammed. So far, the FCC has fined slammers, announcing a $5.7
       million fine this year, and announced voluntary guidelines for cramming that
       local telephone companies say they will follow. We could add money for         .
       enforcement to the FCC and/or DOJ. In May, the Senate overwhelming passed
       legislation that would impose new penalties on slammers and would eliminate
       common slamming methods, such as contest entry forms that, when signed by
       unsuspecting customers, authorize a switch of their long-distance carriers.

       -Telemarketing Fraud. Telemarketing fraud is among America's worst
       white-collar crimes, robbing unsuspecting victims of an estimated $40 billion per
       year. We could increase the FBI budget to increase investigations of this type of
       fraud. Recently, the Washington Post reported that volunteers from the
       American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) work undercover for the FBI,
       posing as potential victims to catch telemarketers on the prowl. Because
       telemarketing fraud often is targeted against the elderly, we could combine this
       piece with the elder abuse in a separate event.

     -ATM Proposal. Weinstein proposes that Treasury publish an annual report on
     consumer financial issues, including ATM fees. In each report, Treasury would
     provide a list of insured financial institutions based on geographic divisions and
by   size. Treasury would report on the following categories: (1) Fees charged to
     depositors at ATMs at their home branches; (2) Fees charged by institutions to
     depositors using other banks ATMs; (3) Fees charged by ATM networks; (4)
ATM fees charged to non-member depositors by institutions; (5) Minimum deposit
     requirements for checking and savings accounts; (6) Fees for overdrafts; and (7)
     Checking account fees. We will need to develop categories which underscore
the  differences in types of accounts. If we just list checking account fees, the fees
that aren't reported would increase.




                                            18
                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

l. Tobacco Counter advertising.  Fund a $200 million per year tobacco Counter
advertising and education campaign, as proposed in the President's 1999 budget and
McCain legislation. This campaign would develop Counter advertising and purchase
enough media time to reach teens at least four times a week. The campaign would also
fund an extensive school-and community-based anti-tobacco education campaign.

2. Tobacco Cessation. Each year, 20 million smokers attempt to quit, but only 1
million, or 5 percent, succeed. More than 90 percent smokers who attempt to quit do
so on their own, and the vast majority fail within 2 to 3 days. However, research shows
that effective cessation methods could raise success rates to 10-20 percent (over 2
million people annually). The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR)
endorsed 5 smoking cessation methods that have been proven to be effective in helping
people to quit: gum, patch, nasal spray, inhaler, and pill (Zyban). A full course of
these treatments costs around $200-300 (for a three months supply, without counseling).
However, less than half of managed care organizations provide coverage of any
AHCPR-approved therapies, and those that provide coverage may impose cost-sharing
requirements that hinder access to treatment. In fact, a study of managed care in
Washington State found that eliminating copayments for smoking cessation services
significantly increased participation rates.

3. Continued call for comprehensive legislation to stop children from smoking before
they start. Total combined cost of all these initiatives: $855 million over 5 years. We
could make a series of proposals, some part of the budget and some not: (1)
Fall --announce new DOD anti-tobacco plan, and new DOL and OPM tobacco-free
workplace programs; (2) Winter --propose Medicaid and Veterans coverage of
cessation benefits through FY2000 Budget; and (3) Spring --tax coverage of cessation as
a medical expense and expanded coverage of cessation benefits in FEHBP.

       New Department of Defense anti-tobacco plan. This plan is still being vetted at
      the agency but will likely include covering over-the-counter nicotine replacement
      therapies under military health care coverage as part of a comprehensive
      military-wide anti-tobacco plan. Cost: $60 million per year.

       Anti-tobacco workplace initiatives by DOL and OPM. DOL could expand its
      drug-free workplace initiative to provide information to employers on steps they
      can take to reduce tobacco use among employees (cost: $63,000 per year). OPM
      could disseminate a model workplace cessation program for all federal agencies
      (agencies would use existing appropriated funds).

       Medicaid coverage. Currently, smoking cessation prescription and
      non-prescription drugs are optional state benefits under the Medicaid statute.

                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                            19        Hex-Dump Conversion
(CBO estimated cost: $120 million over 5 years, HCFA estimated $114 million).
Alternatively, we could propose an enhanced federal matching rate for smoking
cessation treatments, in order to offer the states an incentive to cover these
services. The Hansen-Meehan bill establishes a 90 percent match rate for state
costs of smoking cessation services at an estimated cost of about $110 million
over 5 years. Currently, 23 states cover Zyban, 6 states cover non-prescription
treatments, and 5 states cover cessation counseling. A study by the Center on
Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University found that over 42
percent of Medicaid recipients smoke, as compared to 25 percent of the general
population and that nearly 10 percent of all Medicaid hospital days are
attributable to smoking.

e Veterans. We should re-propose the plan from the President's 1999 budget
which created a new discretionary program open to all veterans who began
using tobacco products while in the service, regardless of their eligibility for
other VA health care services (currently less than 15 percent of veterans receive
their health care through the VA system because of statutory limits --veterans
must be low income or have a service-related injury.) The VA would contract
with private sector entities to furnish AHCPR-approved services to interested
veterans. OMB estimates that this proposal would cost $87 million for the first
year, and $435 million over 5 years. Thirty-six percent of the 25 million
veterans in this country smoke.

eTax Treatment. Currently, the cost of cessation treatment cannot be claimed
as a deductible medical expense because the IRS does not recognize smoking or
tobacco addiction as a "disease." The IRS has indicated in written opinions
that an official medical authority classification of smoking as a disease would
allow cessation to deduct these expenses. Treasury is interested in pursuing this
in 1999. This would be done outside of the budget.

e Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. We could require enhanced
coverage of smoking cessation services. One option is to raise coverage limits to
more accurately reflect the cost of AHCPR-approved treatments, and to raise
the number of treatments allowed per lifetime to account for the fact that the
average smoker: requires three to five cessation attempts before they successfully
quit (i.e., require coverage of $300-400 per treatment, with three maximum
treatments covered per lifetime). Another option is to waive the deductible and
copayment requirement for cessation benefits. Currently FEHBP fee for
service plans, which cover 70 percent of beneficiaries, are required to provide
only $100 in smoking cessation benefits. Generally, this coverage does not kick
in until after the calendar-year deductible has been met, and most plans restrict
benefits to once per lifetime. Many plans only cover prescription drugs. HMO


                                     20
                                                  Automated Records M
                                                                      . anagement Systell
                                                  Hex-DUJnp C        .
                                                             on versIOn
      outside of the budget, but would have to occur in the spring as part of OPM's
      annual letter to contracting plans, establishing the terms for the following year
      of coverage.


WELFARE

1. Helping the Hardest-to-Employ Get and Keep Jobs.

       Extend Welfare-to-Work Grants and Strengthen Focus on Fathers. Funding
      for the $3 billion grant program that the President fought for in the Balanced
      Budget Act ends in FY 1999. These funds are targeted at the hardest-to-place
      welfare recipients, and non-custodial parents of children on welfare, and at
      concentrated areas of poverty. 75% of the funds are allocated to states, who in
      turn pass them to local Private Industry Councils and 25% of the funds are
      available on a competitive basis. We expect DOL to propose extension of the
      grant program in their FY 2000 budget proposal. We should consider revising
      the statutory language to increase the focus on increasing employment of fathers.
      While there is a significant level of interest in serving this population, there is
      likely more we could do to increase the quantity and quality of services. This
      should also increase support from the Ways & Means committee as Shaw is very
      interested in fatherhood issues. Possible approaches include requiring states
      and communities to designate a minimum portion of WTW formula funds for
      fathers, setting aside a portion of competitive grant funds for this purpose, or
      earmarking funds for needed technical assistance and capacity building on this
      relatively new area. Other changes worth considering: shifting more funds
      toward competitive grants, increasing tribal set aside (currently 1%), and
      streamlining data collection requirements. Assuming level funding, this would
      cost $1.5 billion annually.

       Request Additional Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers. We are unlikely to
      get the full 50,000 housing vouchers requested for FY 99. This approach
      continues to have merit, both in helping families move from welfare to work and
      as a catalyst for changing the way local housing authorities, and HUD, do
      business. Cost to fully fund 50,000 vouchers is $283 million. Some, including
      Deich and Edley, have also suggested allowing housing authorities to convert
      Section 8 vouchers that are turning over to the more flexible approach of the
      WTW vouchers.

       Invest in Increasing English Language and other Literacy Skills. There is
      evidence that those with low education levels have a harder time leaving welfare.
       There is also emerging evidence that English language may be a barrier for


                                            21
                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
      explore whether there is more the federal government could do to increase access
      to ESL and other basic education that is combined with work, though this does
      not necessarily have to be done with TANF funds. We need to first explore
      what is available, whether there are successful models that can be replicated,
      and what the demand is.

2. Helping New Workers Succeed in the Workforce/Achieve Self-Sufficiency.
There are several ways to ensure people moving from welfare to work can get to their
jobs:

       Request full $150 million authorized for Access to Jobs for FY 2000 (TEA-21
      set guaranteed funding from the Highway Trust Fund at $60 million for FY
      2000). This would allow DOT to fund more competitive grants. Note these
      funds can be spent on current and former welfare recipients, as well as families
      up to 150% of poverty so they help the working poor as well.

       Donate surplus federal vehicles to welfare to work programs. These could be
      given, leased, or sold to current and former welfare recipients for whom public
      transit it not a viable option, including those living in rural areas. Cars could
      be allocated through community-based organizations or intermediaries. This
      could be modeled after the initiative to donate federal computers to schools.

       Help former welfare recipients access funds to purchase cars. In some areas,
      public transit is not a viable option for a family moving from welfare to work.
      In addition, owning a car is something many poor families aspire to, and
      something that helps them become part of the economic mainstream. Family
      Services of America, and other organizations, currently offer revolving loans for
      low income families to purchase cars. FSA's model currently operates in 20
      sites and is scheduled to expand to 60 sites later this Fall, with partial funding
      from foundations and private financial institutions. They are also seeking
      federal funding to help with this expansion. Possible sources include: HUD,
      Treasury, DOL WTW grants, as well as existing federal and state TANF funds.
      Another option is to expand allowable uses of IDAs to include purchasing a car
      needed to go to work.

       Connection between TANF and Unemployment Insurance. There is growing
      interest in exploring the relationship between these two systems. Historically,
      few welfare recipients have qualified for UI, and some have essentially used
      AFDC as a form of unemployment insurance. As more welfare recipients
      joining the labor force, we need to consider the most appropriate way to provide
      income support to them between jobs. Various approaches include: (a)
      changing rules of the UI system that make it hard for former welfare recipients


                                            22         Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
creative uses of federal T ANF or state MOE funds to provide income support to
people in between jobs. Either approach should be accompanied by a strong
effort to promote job retention and rapid re-employment. This could be
considered as part of a more comprehensive VI reform initiative that NEC has
been considering, but it would not depend on that. NOTE: NGA has a grant to
explore this issue and several states are trying innovative approaches. While we
do not have to frame the issue in terms of planning for economic downturns, it
seems prudent to address this issue earlier rather than later.

e   Optional State Coverage Expansion Through Eligibility Simplification (new policy).
  In the wake of welfare reform, Medicaid eligibility rules have become even more
complex since states must cover people who would have been eligible for AFDC
under the old rules. Additionally, Medicaid law allows states to cover parents but not
adults without children --even if they are very poor. This proposal would allow
states to opt for a pure poverty standard for Medicaid eligibility for all people (like we
do for children) rather than the old categorical eligibility categories. Not only would
such an approach simplify the Medicaid program for families and states; it would
provide an opportunity for significant coverage expansion. While any change in
Medicaid almost always raises concerns amongst some advocates, this proposal would
be strongly supported by the Governors and advocates such as the Center for Budget
and Policy Priorities. (Cost: Depends on the proposal and projected coverage
expansion take-up rates).

eTransitional Medicaid. Families can currently receive Transitional Medicaid
for up to 12 months after leaving welfare, but only about 20 to 30 percent of
eligible families are enrolled. The program has many procedural hurdles that
make it more difficult to access than regular Medicaid coverage and the 12
months transitional period is too short for many families. The budget could
eliminate some of the current prescriptive reporting requirements now in the
law (that, for example, requires families to report earnings in the fourth,
seventh, and tenth months of coverage and divides the 12 months of coverage
into two 6 month segments with different co-pay and benefit rules) and allow
states to provide a full 12 months of coverage without regard to changes in
family circumstances, similar to the 12-month option for children that was
adopted in the Balanced Budget Act. In addition, the budget could provide
states the option of extending transitional Medicaid to 24 or 36. These ideas
need to be fully discussed, vetted, and cos ted out. The current program
reauthorization sunsets in 2001.

eExtend the Work Opportunity Tax Credit and Welfare-to-Work Tax Credits
(WOTC has already expired and WTW will expire in 1999).


                                          23
                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dwnp Conversion

1. Expanding the Defense Department's "CAP" program. The Defense Department's
Computer Accommodations Program ("CAP") purchases equipment for DOD
employees with disabilities to allows them to keep working ifthey become disabled, or
for new employees just joining the workforce. By using a central $2 million fund for
such purchases, individual offices do not have to bear the cost within their own budgets,
and are less likely to be deterred from hiring a person with a disability. CAP is also
able to get better prices on equipment through its bulk purchases and expertise. It has
a showroom to help employees try out appropriate adaptive devices (CAP makes the
decision on what equipment is purchased, not the employee). It has provided over
9,000 accommodations since its inception in 1990. This program is a good example of
how employers and employees are taking advantage of new (and increasingly cheap)
technology, such as computers for the blind that talk and listen, and alternative
computer keyboards for people with dexterity problems, that allow people with
disabilities to work. Expanding the program has the strong support of the
Administration's appointees with disabilities, in particular for Tony Coelho, chair of
the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities.

Defense has estimated that it would cost $8 million a year to expand CAP
government-wide, but this is likely overstated since CAP now serves the entire Defense
Department for $2 million a year. A more realistic range is $2 -5 million a year.
While having DOD perform this service for all federal employees is a bit unusual, they
have a great deal of expertise at this task and they are ready to take on the added
responsibility.

2. Tax Credit for Disability Related Expenses. New tax credit for employers and/or
individuals with disabilities with extraordinary disability-related expenses, such as
assistive technology or a personal assistant. The proposed credit would allow a credit
of 50 percent of the first $10,000 of disability-related work expenses. [Need Treasury
information on scoring.]

3. New BRIDGE grant program. This program would create interdisciplinary
consortiums ofservice providers (employment, transportation, etc.) to better assist
people with disabilities in going to work. NEC and DPC will receive revised proposal
shortly from the President's Task Force on Employment of People with Disabilities and
will evaluate and vet.

4. Information and Communication Technologies for People with Disabilities. NEC
has developed draft proposals now being vetted to ensure that new technologies will be
designed from the beginning to be accessible to people with disabilities. Ideas include


                                            24
                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
consortia, training the next generation of engineers, etc. (Tom Kalil is working on this,
coordinating with DPC and OMB).




                                             25              Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 037 - FOLDER -005


[09/09/1998]
