RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-SEP-1998 15:16:18.00

SUBJECT:   Country of Origin and food safety

TO: Elena Kagan
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN;Mary L. Smith/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a note on the status of food labeling.

In addition, I have given some more thought to the question Elena raised
last week -- what should be our new program for food safety? For the past
year we have emphasized the need for greater resources (the $101 million
Initiative) and an improved organization of agencies (the Research
Institute and the Food Safety Council).   Perhaps the next emphasis should
be put on improving standards and enforcement.   The elements to this could
be, but not limited to, a.) trying to get states to adopt our food safety c
ode; b). pushing for USDA to be given recall authority for tainted food;
and c.) some more food specific regulations (similar to juice) which we
could explain is part of this yearlong effort.   The idea would be that we
would line up this third element of standards as the key part of the
upcoming year, even as we move ahead on making sure we get sufficient
resources and make sure the Council works.   It would likely not be a
significant cost in the budget.  I plan on going ahead and sitting down
with agency folks and pushing this idea and see what new major things they
could add to such a standards package.  I think it might be the germ of a
good idea.

Country of origin labeling.

1.    Recent events. Last week Secretary Glickman met with Senators
Johnson, Craig, Burns, Baucus, and Dorgan (as well as staff from other
offices, including Senator Daschle) to discuss the country of origin
labeling amendment to the Ag Approps bill.    In the meeting, Secretary
Glickman made it clear that he was not present to give the
Administration's position or support for the amendment but rather to
provide technical assistance relative to concerns raised by the
amendment.   He also indicated that other agencies, such as USTR, DPC,
OMB, State, FDA and Customs must be consulted on this issue.

2.   What the Amendment does. The amendment as adopted would only apply
to beef and lamb (not pork or poultry) and would require "imported"
labeling rather than individual country of origin labeling, which is a
legal problem relative to
our trade agreements (and one of the areas in which the Senate will
change).  It would apply to muscle cuts as well as ground and processed
products.   The amendment would not allow cattle that are shipped into the
·

u.s. in sealed trucks for slaughter to bear the u.s. label (which is
allowed under current law).   On the other hand, cattle that were fed at a
u.s. feedyard for 1 week, for example, would be
labeled u.s.

USDA also raised issues about providing for civil penalties for violations
of
the country of origin requirements if enacted.   Currently, USDA can only
impose criminal penalties (and the Admin. is seeking broader civil penalty
authority via the Harkin bill). USDA also raised issues about providing
USDA
the authority to traceback product and expressed concerns that we did not
want to divert resources from food safety to implement and enforce this
amendment.   (informal agency estimates of about $6.5 million for a study
as well as rulemaking and enforcement)

An additional issue that was not raised in the meeting has to do with the
timing of the amendment. As drafted, there are several different
timeframes,
with 4 months being the tightest, for promulgating rules. USDA intends to
communicate to staff about the need for realistic timeframes for
rulemaking.

3. Future in conference.   It is unclear what will occur on this issue
during conference. Ways and Means Chairman Archer has objected to this
amendment (as well as the fruit and vegetable country of origin
amendment), and Senate Ag Chair Lugar and House Ag. Chair Smith have also
objected.  Industry is strongly opposed, but the
National Cattleman's Beef Association, National Farmers Union, and American
Farm Bureau Federation strongly support.   Consumer groups generally
support
country of origin labeling but do not view this as a high priority issue
(they
would support the traceback authority) .

The bipartisan group of Senators with whom Secretary Glickman met indicated
that they would fight strongly to include the amendment and also expressed
interest in working to address some of the concerns about the amendment.


