RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [,OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-SEP-1998 19:37:59.00

SUBJECT:   Latest Draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D68]MAIL40763375I.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A2050000010A02010000000205000000646E010000020000B5A784A3750B96C9922AB1
FCBD2B2F28FBE05A47D15321F851215200D98675BOD9FODA81F36089B4ED1433FF29FD5E392E98
4F89673ED17124400C6B29F94F4F8BE908B279E7D179203F6EA079D28A835C8F432D190FB61061
14E5B5FCBFF3CBF34D23D6C866E7F743F45107613A54B2115BE2BO6423887F12FFD20EA6E7757A


MEMORANDUM FOR BRUCE REED
               ELENA KAGAN

FROM:                     Domestic Policy Council Staff

SUBJECT:                  Compilation of Preliminary New Ideas


CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

1. Child Care. Reintroduce the President's child care proposal. This includes: increased
funding for the Child Care and Development Block Grant; increased tax credits for working
families to help them pay for child care; a fund to invest in programs that support early childhood
learning and development; after-school care through the 21 st Century Learning Center program;
and programs to improve child care safety and quality through a fund to states to enforce
standards better, scholarships for child care providers, and additional funding for evaluation and
research.

2. Paid Parental Leave. Many workers, including those covered by the Family and Medical
Leave Act, cannot afford to take leave at the birth or adoption of a child. This proposal would
provide paid parental leave for a limited period of time to working parents with family incomes
below a set amount. For example, a new proposal could provide 6 weeks of paid leave to all
new parents who have been in the workforce either part-time or full-time for one year and
whose family income is below $50,000, at a cost of $1 billion per year. This proposal could
use the unemployment insurance system to provide the leave payments, but would be paid
for by the federal government.

 3. Home Visitation. Home visiting programs, in which a trained professional (such as a
nurse) pays routine and intensive visits to pregnant mothers and new parents, have proven
successful in strengthening families and improving child outcomes, particularly reducing
child abuse. We propose to create a grant program to fund the development or expansion
of home visitation programs, with priority given to areas with high rates of child
maltreatment.

4. Child Welfare. Each year, thousands of foster children "age out" of the child welfare
system; at age 18, children lose their foster care maintenance assistance funding, and many
have neither been reunified with their family nor adopted. In the next 3 years,
approximately 65,000 children will "age out." We propose increasing by 50% the Federal
Independent Living Program (ILP), which assists adolescents aged 16-18 in the foster care
system as they prepare for independence. The ILP provides services to help foster care


                                                 I
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
skills such as budgeting, locating housing, planning a career, and finding a job. The
program was begun in 1984, and has been funded at $70 million annually since 1992.
Funds are awarded directly to the States, which receive a base amount by formula and
additional funds at a 1: 1 match ratio.

5. Child Tax Credit. The 1997 Balanced Budget Agreement created a Child Tax Credit of$500
per child for families. We would propose an expansion of the credit to families with children
under three, in order to better support working families. This tax credit may allow some parents
to spend more time with children by enabling them to forego some income. The proposal would
benefit both families in which both parents work, as well as families in which one parent stays at
home. This proposal would roughly cost $5 billion over five years.

6. Home Office Tax Deduction. We propose an expansion ofthe Home Office Tax Deduction
in order to create incentives for parents to work from home so that they may spend more time
with their children. This proposal would allow the taxpayer to claim additional expenses of the
costs of working from home, such as Internet hook-up costs. It would cut down on commuting
time, thereby allowing parents to spend more time with their children. In addition, the tax
deduction would help reduce pollution costs associated with commuting.

7. Flex-Time: We propose offering tax credits to all companies that offer a variety of
family-friendly benefits, including flexible work hours for their employees, compressed work
weeks, part-time work with benefits, job sharing, career sequencing, and extended parental leave.
  Such a tax credit would enable parents to spend more time with their children by providing
companies, both small and large, to respond to the time crunch families are facing. In addition,
it builds on our flex-time proposal (which allows workers to take their over-time compensation
as vacation time) and family-leave proposal.

8. After-school programs: In order to meet the growing concerns parents have over how their
children are occupied in the hours between the end of the school day and the time parents arrive
at home, we propose an expansion of our after-school initiative. A poll recently conducted by
the Mott Foundation found that 92% of Americans believe there should be organized activity for
children after school; 78% strongly share this view. In order to address this growing consensus,
we propose first expanding our 21 st Century Learning Centers Initiative, which supports
school-based after-school programs. In addition, we propose creating a set-aside within the
Child Care and Development Block Grant targeted to after-school programs run by
community-based organizations.


CIVIL RIGHTS

 1. Enhance the CRS program at Justice. The Community Relations Service at Justice has
been a significant force in cooling racial tensions in communities all over the country. Since the


                                                2
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
provide mediation services to resolve community civil rights concerns as an alternative to
litigation; and (2) provide CRS conflict resolution training and technical assistance to
communities. The CRS is very popular with the AG and she often talks of wanting it
strengthened.

2. Inter-Agency Task force on Discrimination. This initiative would create an inter-agency
task force (headed by the Civil Rights Division at Justice) to expand research on the extent of
racial discrimination in the country. The research would focus on developing uniform testing
protocols in housing, employment, and access to capital and then using these tools to asses the
nature and extent of discrimination in these areas. This effort could be linked to agency
compliance and/or enforcement work.

3. Improve Civil Rights Information Sharing. This proposal would provide funds to establish
and maintain a system that links the data bases of agencies with civil rights enforcement
responsibilities -- thus allowing, for example, OCR at Education to have better access to work
being done by the Education Section at Civil Rights.

4. Becoming an American. A national effort to focus on easing the transition to the U.S. for
new immigrants. We could provide grants to community-based organizations that fund English
and civics classes for new immigrants. Also, we could encourage the development of programs
that provide practical transition-type help to new immigrants -- such as understanding the public
education system; understanding the housing system, etc. According to the INS, there is a bit of
this being done on the community level, but they do not fund any of it. Also, some of the
education bits are done by the Dept. of Ed. (adult education and/or literacy), but not in a
coordinated way. HHS funds some transition work for refugees. This general idea was first
talked about by the Jordan Commission.

5. Sweat-Shop Initiative. Expand enforcement against labor abuses in "sweatshops" and on
farms that employ migrant farm laborers. Many of the wage & hour laws in place to protect
low-wage workers are not adequately enforced by the Department of Labor, in part because of
dramatic reduction in funding for these efforts during the 1980s. These workplaces often serve
as places of gateway employment for new immigrants, and thus the abuses disproportionally
affect Latinos and Asians.

6. Equal Pay. A program that could be run by the EEOC and DOL to increase outreach
to businesses to educate them about the legal requirements for paying equal wages, provide
technical assistance, improve training for EEOC employees and resources for increases in
enforcement capabilities.




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                               3
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

1. Access To Capital Por AD Americans.

       -CDPI Tax Credit. In 1996, we proposed a tax credit for investors in CDFIs.      We
       could re-propose this $100 million non-refundable tax credit. The maximum amount of
       credit allocable to a particular investment would be 25 percent of the amount invested.

       - Voluntary CRA.     Launch a bully pulpit effort to encourage non-bank financial
       institutions   to develop and implement principles for community investment.

       -Micro-Enterprise. Provide authorization and funding for CDFI Fund to provide
       technical assistance to micro enterprise organizations and micro-entrepreneurs (PRIME
       Act, Kennedy-Domenici).
       -Secondary Market. Develop coordinated administration initiative to take first steps
       towards secondary market for community development loans, including data collection,
       education, standardization, regulatory review, and the creation of a loan loss reserve fund
       to back pools of community development loans pooled and sold by the private sector.

       -Pair Lending. Continue to push the Fed to permit collection of data on race and
       income of small business borrowers; consider legislation if this fails.

       -Capital Access Programs.  Push to give the CDFI Fund authorization to launch small
       business capital enhancement program to back state-run loan loss reserve funds that
       permit banks to make more difficult small business loans.

2. Sustainable Development.

       -Environmental Activity Bonds. In response to the growing needs of urban areas, an
       environmental bond would help cities meet the environmental goals set by the Clinton
       Administration. EPA has identified three areas which would be candidates eligible to
       receive funding: brownfields, drinking water, urban river/waterfront cleanup, and the
       creation of parks and other public spaces. Drinking water (as cities need to improve
       infrastructure to meet the requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act) and brownfields
       are two areas that cities continue to seek assistance for financing. Our preference is to be
       more inclusive and allow municipalities increased flexibility to identify their priorities.
       However, there should be attention paid to how this financing would intersect with other
       Administration initiatives like the Clean Water Action Plan, Drinking Water Revolving
       Loan Fund, and TEA-21.
                                                 4          Automated Records Management System
                                                            H~" -nIJ~'" "'f'I"'VE"~1()n
       corridor and wetlands restoration efforts tailored to improve the human health and
       economic opportunities in urban communities. To date, EPA has made small grants to
       a number of cities and municipalities for these types of projects. With additional grants
       to local communities, the Agency could provide the necessary funding for projects to
       improve community water resources. These projects would provide employment
       opportunities for residents, benefit the economic welfare and technical competence of local
       residents, and empower the community to build for a better future. Restored areas can
       serve to attract and sustain business as well as provide outlets for recreation.

       -Community Preference and Visualization Tools.      Building the social capital necessary to
       change transportation and land-use policies to create more livable communities also
       requires tools that the average citizen can use to understand the implications of major
       policy choices. EPA proposed to act as a catalyst in the development and use of such
       innovative decision making tools. The types of tools would include: 1) Community
       Preference Surveys, which show communities pictures of different neighborhood types,
       and help the community reach a consensus about the types of development that are
       desirable; 2) simulation tools, which would get a community "development ready" or
       help a community experiment with alternatives that have been proposed; and 3) new
       software, accessible to the public as well as urban planners, to view and evaluate
       alternative urban designs for any community.

       -Asthma Initiatives. Through better implementation and new investments, EPA believes
       the Federal government can take action that will show immediate and long term results to
       reduce asthma rates among children.

       -Air Quality Credits.     EPA proposes to provide incentives to transportation planning by
       developing protocols for potential air quality credits toward state attainment plans for
       locally-initiated strategies and projects that create less auto-dependent communities.
       Similarly, the Agency proposes to create the next generation of the Clean Air Brownfields
       Partnership Pilot by continuing and expanding its ongoing efforts to link air quality goals
       and brownfields/infill redevelopment. After 2000, EPA proposes to partner with cities
       that have a significant brownfield site in the decision-making phase of redevelopment,
       work with the city, state, and developer to come up with a project design that maximizes
       air quality benefits, and allow credit for these activities under the State Implementation
       Plan.

3. Job Creation in Distressed Communities.


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                 5
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
       this idea to establish a Federal grant program to fund local Infra structural improvements.
         This would spark revitalization of declining or stagnant low-income areas by providing
       funds to upgrade local infrastructure. These Federal dollars could leverage State, local,
       and private funds for such Infra structural efforts.

       -Community Revitalization Tax Credit. LISC proposes a Community Revitalization Tax
       Credit (CRTC) --similar to the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit --to help stimulate
       private-sector investment in commercial property in under served neighborhoods.

       -Community Development Corporation Tax Credit. In 1993, we put in place a
       demonstration tax credit for investors in 20 CDCs. According to this report for Bruce
       Katz' shop at Brookings, this program has been effective. We could propose expanding
       this CDC tax credit to more areas. The author of this report also proposes some
       changes to make the tax credit more effective.

       -Expand and Rationalize Employer-Side Tax Incentives. This includes EZs, Welfare to
       Work, WOTC, DC Jobs Credit.

       - Working Ventures Fund. Fund one or more national non-profits to fund, evaluate, share
       best practices, develop networks, and link non-profits to their business community, in the
       job training and placement field, as LISC and Enterprise do in the housing

       -Community Empowerment Fund          a) Include targeting for welfare to work projects; b)
       allow links to venture capital focused on minority-owned or small business in distressed
       areas; c) eliminate mandatory pledge of CDBG dollars for CEF loans.

       -Metro Jobs/Community Development Corporation (CDC) Links. Would target job-poor
       but CDC-served central-city neighborhoods to create or strengthen a welfare-to-work
       infrastructure that is place-based but people-focused and regional in orientation (where
       the jobs are). Would build on HUD's Bridges to Work and complement DOL and
       HHS efforts, focusing on concentrations of assisted housing run by CBOs.

4. Low Income Savings.

       -Asset Development for Section 8 Voucher Recipients. Currently, an individual still sees
       the size of their subsidy reduced for each extra dollar he/she earns. This new idea from
       Liebman and Orszag would roll-over any savings --or a part of the savings --from an
       individual earning more money into an Individual Development Account (IDA). That
       is, if the size of a person's Section 8 voucher is reduced by about 30 cents for each extra


                                                6
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
       also the capabilities created by EFT '99 to electronically transfer money to efficiently
       establish IDAs for more Americans.

       eBrownfields Meets Community Development.      Under this proposal, we would push banks
       to invest in brownfields as part of their CRA commitments.


5. Affordable Housing.

       eElderly Housing Initiative. 1) Housing modernization grants to existing elderly housing
       projects for modernization, physical redesign, and/or conversion to assisted living; 2)
       Expanded and more flexible service coordinator grants to meet needs of increasingly frail
       population in public and assisted housing; 3) authority for PHAs to use vouchers for the
       housing component of assisted living costs.

       eRegional Affordable Housing Initiative.  Targeting regions with severe jobs-housing
       imbalance and established partnerships for regional collaboration, HUD would provide
       grants and loan guarantees to support planning, regulatory streamlining across
       jurisdictions, and development.

       e   Vouchers.   An expanded request will focus on incrementals, welfare to work, and
       homeless.

6. Promoting Homeownership In Distressed Communities.

       eLow-Income Homeownership Tax Credit. Self-Help --a community group in North
       Carolina --proposes a tax credit for investors who provide second mortgages to
       low-income families. This could significantly reduce the barriers to homeowners hip
       among low-income families, who do not really benefit from the home mortgage interest
       deduction.

       eIncrease Allocation 0/Mortgage Revenue Bonds. Each state receives a supply of
       tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds. These bonds help low-income families become
       homeowners and help develop affordable rental housing. There are currently 53
       co-sponsors of legislation in the Senate and 316 co-sponsors of legislation in the House to
       increase the allocation of mortgage revenue bonds by slightly more than 50 percent and
       then index it to the rate of inflation.

       eExpand Use o/Mortgage Credit Certificates. Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCCs) are

                                                  7
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion



           credits against federal income tax equal to between 10 and 50 percent of mortgage interest
           (to a limit of $2,000 per homeowner) issued by state governments. MCCs count
           against state's ability to issue mortgage revenue bonds. We could propose to expand the
           MCC program to allow the limit to be $4,000 for homeowners in EZs or ECs. We
           could also propose allowing states to not have to count MCCs against their mortgage
           revenue bond base.

            eFirst-Time Homebuyer Tax Credit. The 1997 tax law put in place a $5,000 tax credit for
            first-time homebuyers in the District of Columbia. To boost homeownership in
            Empowerment Zones, we could propose allowing any first-time homebuyer in an EZ to
            take advantage of this tax provision.

            eHistoric Homeownership Assistance Tax Credit. The National Trust for Historic
            Preservation proposes a 20-percent tax credit to homeowners who rehabilitate or purchase
            a newly rehabilitated historic home and occupy it as a principal residence.

            eHomeownership Vouchers.     Already authorized, would apply rental subsidies to
            mortgage-related expenses for first-time homebuyers who were Section 8 tenants.


     EDUCATION

     1. Class Size Reduction. Reintroduce President's proposal to reduce class size in grades
     1-3 to an average of18. Needs to be funded on the mandatory side. If necessary, we
     could combine this with a teacher quality/recruitment initiative, so that funds in the early
     years of the program are devoted to (1) incentives for people to enter teaching and/or (2)
     teacher training and professional development.

     2. School Modernization. We've tried this on the mandatory side and we've tried this on
     the tax side. Assuming we don't get it this year, we've got to try again next year.

     3. School Discipline/Safety. We are working on an overhaul of the Safe and Drug Free
     Schools Program, that will: (1) focus the program on comprehensive, proven approaches
     to improve school discipline and safety; (2) better target the funds to schools/communities
     with the greatest needs; and, (3) improve data collection and reporting, including school
     report cards on safety/discipline issues. Because the program currently spreads (small
     amounts of) funds around to almost all school, and because of its initial emphasis on
     keeping schools drug-free, the politics of this program will probably require that any shift
     in emphasis on greater targeting will require additional resources.

     4. Teacher Supply and Quality. Here are three initial ideas for improving teacher
     quality. The first two came out of our initial discussions on the President's race report.

                                                    8             Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
make them more universal. We can also break out particular pieces of them into separate
initiatives if we want to:

          . Make sure there are qualified teachers in high poverty schools. First,
          encourage and support state and local efforts to improve the preparation,
          certification, recruitment, selection, induction, retention, evaluation, reward and
          dismissal of teachers overall. Support necessary R&D on critical components of
          an upgraded system, such assessing teacher competence in the classroom.
          Second, work to end the practice of disproportionately placing and keeping
          unqualified teachers in high poverty schools. Require states to require
          prospective teacher to pass basic skills/subject matter tests (and help them
          develop more demanding assessments) in order to be licensed Prohibit school
          districts receiving Title 1 funds from staffing Title 1 funded classes (what about
          schoolwides???) with unqualified teachers, and bar those without an effective
          system for teacher evaluation (including removal of incompetent teachers) from
          receiving Federal (or just Title 1) funds. Require K-4 teachers in Title 1 schools
          to successfully complete training in teaching reading, and fund the training.
          Third, help attract and retain the best teachers for high poverty schools. Fund
          induction and continuing professional development programs in high poverty
          schools. Provide incentives for Board-certified teachers to teach in high poverty
          schools .

          . Recruit More Minority Teachers. Many believe that a major factor
          influencing children's success in education is role models. Enhance current
          recruitment programs with effective incentives to attract more minorities to the
          teaching profession. Minority teachers, administrators, and school personnel
          serve as role models for minority students and can provide an important link
          between schools and parents.

          eEstablish subject-specific teacher/administrator training
          institutes/academies/centers in every state. There are crying needs to train
          existing teachers in key subject areas, such as reading, technology use,
          math/science and other academic subject. We should establish subject specific
          training centers in each state (or perhaps in geographic regions within states).
          The idea is to create a place, probably at a university, that has the
          subject-matter capacity and can work with school systems to develop and
          implement a strategy for ensuring that every teacher who needs it gets high
          quality, intensive and ongoing training in the subject and how to teach it. This
          could either substitute for or complement the current teacher training program
          (Eisenhower Professional Development Program), which provides funds to states
          and school districts on a formula basis, with broad discretion on how the funds
          can be used for professional development. We could also establish training


                                             9
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

       · Continuing the Troops to Teachers (TTT) program (due to phase out in Oct
       1999). TTT provides stipends to encourage retired military personnel to teach
       and school districts to hire and train them. TTT attracts more minorities and
       men into the teaching profession than are traditionally represented, they have
       background in understaffed subjects such as math and science, and are more
       willing to teach in inner-city classrooms.

S. Recruiting and Training Principals. Most states and communities lack good
strategies for recruiting and preparing individuals with the knowledge and skills to provide
the kind ofleadership and management schools need right now. We could propose a
competitive demonstration program to provide focus, leadership and effective models for the
field. This would not be a big-ticket item.

6. UrbanlRural Initiative. This could take two forms. One would be some version of
Education Opportunity Zones--a competitive grants program that rewards performance and
requires accountability. A second would be to create local performance partnerships, in
which local communities agree to create schools that are safe, have high standards and
qualified teachers, after-school programs, tutors and other forms of extra help for kids,
technology, etc. The districts would be responsible for creating schools with these
opportunities, and would be accountable for improving achievement across the board
(perhaps as measured against national standards). In return, the districts would (I) be able to
combine funds from relevant ED and other programs, so they can figure out the best way to
provide the learning opportunities; (2) get extra funding over and above the funding from the
existing categorical programs; and (3) gain or lose additional funding based on performance
(with some floor established to minimize the risk for districts).

7. Choice Demonstration Program. Establish a demonstration program to challenge
states and school districts/cities to expand the range of high quality schools students and
families can choose among, thereby enabling students in low performing schools to move to
better ones. A variety of approaches should be encouraged, including:

       · Community College Enrollment. High school students should be permitted to
       enroll in community colleges, for high school level or college level courses. This
       step could provide inner city students with access to more qualified teachers, because
       most community colleges have faculty with subject matter expertise (whereas urban
       high schools often have teachers teaching out of field). It could also help boost
       minority enrollment in college. [see if this can build on existing tech-prep programs,
       or other articulation agreements.]

       · Contract School System. Transform urban school systems from bureaucracies
       which operate large numbers of schools into systems in which the local governing


                                                10         Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex.Dump Conversion
      management firms, etc. In effect every school becomes a charter school, with a
      distinct mission, control over its own staffing and budget, and accountable for results.
       The local school board is responsible for selecting the schools, identifying new types
      of schools that might be needed and soliciting proposals to operate the school,
      monitoring the performance of each school and holding it accountable. Under this
      approach, all schools would eventually be schools of choice.[see Paul Hill's work for
      background on this]

      . Schools located at large employers. Encourage large employers to provide
      facilities on site for schools for children of their own employees, while the school
      district provides the teachers, curriculum, instructional materials, etc. Dade County's
      Satellite Learning Centers provide the model for this approach. Dade's experience
      shows that these schools can (1) be more diverse than other schools, because work
      sites are more diverse than residential neighborhoods (2) save the school districts the
      cost of new facilities (3) save employers costs associated with employee turnover and
      (4) increase parental involvement in the schools.

      -Expanding choice through smaller, schools-with in-schools. Transform large,
      impersonal schools into smaller schools-with in-schools that would dramatically
      expand choices within public education for families without requiring students
      to leave their neighborhoods. Many parents want more choice in education but
      don't want to send their children to school far from home. This proposal would
      address that need and enable many more students to get the personalized
      learning attention that so many families want; it also may reduce discipline and
      violence problems. A grants program could support networks of schools or
      school districts to plan and implement this concept and provide information and
      counseling to help students and their families make good choices. This proposal
      could be linked or combined with the "contract" schools concept by creating a
      competitive process to award contracts to manage each school-within-a-school to
      teachers, non-profits, charter schools, etc.

8. English Language Acquisition. As part of the planned overhaul of the Bilingual
Education Program, we should consider a number of initiatives:

      . Make every LEP child competent in English within 3 years of obtaining
      services. English language competency is the key to success in schooling and the
      economy. ESL and similar services should be made universally available to all
      students who need them. Federal funding can provide matching grants to
      States to do this. The requirement--including funding and accountability--for
      serving LEP kids and helping them become competent in English within 3 years
      should be built into the Title 1 program. Other programs, such as after-school
      and technology, should also be designed so that in schools with significant


                                               11
                                                        Automated Records t-.fanagement System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
       3 years .

       · Support English Plus. In addition to ensuring that all LEP students learn
       English, we should promote foreign language learning, starting in the early
       grades, for student's whose native language is English. The objective is to
       dramatically increase the number of students who leave school fluent in two or
       more languages, regardless of their native language.

       . Support demonstrations of, and if effective greatly expand "Newcomer High
       Schools" for recently arrived immigrant students. Many school districts are
       facing an increasing number of secondary immigrant students who have low
       level English or native language skills, and in many cases, have had limited
       formal education in their native countries. In order to prevent these students
       from dropping out (and these children are a significant factor in the 40%
       Hispanic drop-out rate), these students must learn English, take the required
       content courses and catch up to their U.S. peers. Some district have developed
       Newcomer programs --either a separate school or a school-within-a-school.
       These programs typically educate students for a limited period of time (most for
       less than two years) before enrolling them in their home schools. Three such
       schools are 4-year high schools. The programs reach beyond the students
       themselves, providing classes to orient parents to the U.S. and 63% offer adult
       ESL classes. There are currently 7S such programs in 18 States and the Center
       for Applied Linguistics has sponsored an evaluation of their effectiveness.

9. Quality pre-school education. We can propose an initiative to make quality
pre-school universally available, or at least universally available for poor kids. There
should be two key components to this. One is to provide a number of funding streams
to pay for it. Head Start should be the base, though we should also look at ways in
which Title 1 could playa larger role. Second, we should provide incentives to both
preschools and school districts that receive federal funds, to work together to help
ensure that the preschools programs are focused on helping kids get ready for school,
by requiring the schools to reach out to preschools and let them know what they expect
kids to know and be able to do when they come to kindergarten, and by giving the
preschools the help they need to provide an appropriate curriculum.

10. Federal Matching Funds for AP courses and for AP and SAT/ACT Preparation.
The President has made universal access to two years of higher education a priority,
and has created ways to alleviate the financial hurdles. A logical next step in
improving the quality of access is to make all students more competitive by closing the
gaps in advanced course availability as well as SAT and ACT test scores. The Federal
government could establish funding matching mechanisms to encourage states to
improve access to AP courses and preparation for AP tests in low-income schools; in


                                             12          Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex·Dump Conversion
community colleges that offer similar courses. Similarly, matched funds could be used
to do one of a number of things for SAT/ACT preparation: pay for low-income youth to
attend prep courses (e.g., Kaplan; Princeton Review); fund poor school districts to set
up their own test prep programs; as in America Reads, waive the federal match for
Work Study students who help prepare disadvantaged students for the tests.

11. ''High Hopes" for Adults. While the President has made enormous progress in
making available resources for higher education for people of all ages, the primary
focus of Administration informational campaigns and initiatives like High Hopes have
been to encourage young people to go to college. A new initiative could combine two
efforts. First, the Administration could launch an informational campaign
encouraging adults to go back to school and inform them of new resources available to
help, including Lifetime Learning and Hope Scholarship Tax Credits, Individual
Training Accounts under the new Workforce Investment Act, and Pell Grants (which
apparently few realize can be used for part-time students). Second, a new "High
Hopes" grants program targeted at adults, partly focused on encouraging minorities
and women to go back to school, could support local partnerships of business,
community colleges, labor unions, one-stop centers and others to provide the
information and counseling needed to encourage and assist adults to enroll in courses
and programs that will help them succeed in their local job market.

12. Encourage High Schools to Offer/Require Service Learning.         We should
consider expanding the service learning initiative (Learn and Serve) to encourage more
school districts to incorporate service into their education programs. The service
learning program could be expanded to provide a stronger infrastructure, e.g., service
coordinators for high schools, in order to make the service experience both more
rewarding and educational for students.


HEALTH

1. Long-Term Care and Medicare Reforms for Elderly, Disabled and Their Families ·

      . Long-term care tax credit. Along with the lack of coverage of prescription
      drugs, the poor coverage of long-term care represents a major cost burden for
      the elderly and their families. Long-term care costs account for nearly half of
      all out-of-pocket health expenditures for Medicare beneficiaries. This proposal
      would give people with two or more limitations in activities of daily living (ADL)
      or their care givers a tax credit of $500 (or more, if affordable) to help pay for
      formal or informal long-term care. This initiative would be coupled with other
      long-term care policies (e.g., offering private long-term care insurance offering
      to Federal employees). (Cost: About $4 billion over         5 years, offset by closing


                                             l3
                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

· Offering private long-term care insurance to Federal employees. Since
expanding Federal programs alone cannot address the next century's long-term
care needs, the Federal government --as the nation's largest employer --could
illustrate that a model employer should promote high-quality private long-term
care insurance policies to its employees. Under this proposal, OPM would offer
its employees the choice of buying differing types of high quality policies and use
its market leverage to extract better prices for these policies. There would be no
Federal contribution for this coverage. (Cost: Small administrative costs; OPM
estimates about 300,000 participants).

· Tax credit for work-related impairment expenses for people with disabilities.
Almost 75 percent of people with significant disabilities are unemployed; many
of those within the population cite the cost of employment support
services/devices, as well as the potential to lose Medicaid or Medicare coverage,
as the primary barriers to seeking and keeping employment. This proposal,
strongly advocated by your Task Force on Employment of Adults with
Disabilities, would give a 50 percent tax credit, up to $5,000, for
impairment-related work expenses. It could be a stand alone proposal in the
budget or packaged as a long-term care initiative if we decide to defer
announcing the long-term care tax credit. (Cost: About $500 million over 5
years, offset by closing tax loopholes, and would help about 300,000 people).

·New Family Care giver "One-Stop-Shop" Support Program. About 50 million
people provide some type of long-term care to family and friends. Families who
have a relative who develops long-term care needs often do not know how to
provide such care and where to turn for help. This proposal would give grants
from the Administration on Aging to states to provide for a "one-stop-shop"
access point to assist families who care for elderly relatives with 2 or more ADL
limitations and/or severe cognitive impairment. This assistance would include
providing information, counseling, training and arranging for respite services
for caregivers. (Cost: About $500 -750 million over 5 years).

· Adding prescription drug coverage to Medicare (new policy). The lack of
coverage for prescription drugs in Medicare is widely believed to be its most
glaring shortcoming. Recognizing the medical community's reliance on
prescriptions for the provision of much of the care provided to Americans,
virtually every private health plan for the under-65 population has a drug
benefit. Medicare's lack of coverage is largely responsible for the fact that drug
costs are the highest out-of-pocket cost for three out of four elderly. This burden
will only become more acute in the next century as the vast majority of advances
in health care interventions will be pharmacologically-based. Responding to


                                      14
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
      almost every health care policy expert, are consistently stating that reforming
      Medicare without addressing the prescription drug coverage issue would be a
      mistake. We are developing a wide variety of options, including a means-tested
      option, a managed care benefit only approach, and a traditional benefit for all
      beneficiaries. If desirable, a proposal could be included in the budget or
      coordinated with the March release of the Medicare Commission's
      recommendations. (Cost: Varies significantly depending on proposal, but could
      be $1 -20 billion a year; assumed offset would be Medicare savings, which might
      more easily be achieved in context of a broader reform proposal).

      · Cancer clinical trials demonstration (FY 1999 budget; not passed). Less than
      three percent of cancer patients participate in clinical trials. Moreover,
      Americans over the age of 65 make up half of all cancer patients, and are 10
      times more likely to get cancer than younger Americans. This proposed
      three-year demonstration, extremely popular with the cancer patient advocacy
      community, would cover the patient care costs associated with certain
      high-quality clinical trials. (Cost: $750 million over 3 years).

      · Redesigning and increasing enrollment in Medicare's premium assistance
      program (extension of July executive action and new policy). Over 3 million
      low-income Medicare beneficiaries are eligible but do not receive Medicaid
      coverage of their Medicare premiums and cost sharing. Many more may not
      get enough assistance through the new, BBA provision that is supposed to help
      higher income beneficiaries. We are developing a range of proposals that build
      on the President's actions in this area to better utilize Social Security Offices to
      educate beneficiaries about this program, to reduce administrative complexity
      for states and to give them incentives to engage in more aggressive outreach
      efforts. (Costs vary depending on policies; probably about $500 million to $2
      billion over 5 years).

2. Health Insurance Coverage Expansions.

      · Providing new coverage options for people ages 55 to 65 (FY 1999 budget; not
      passed). Americans ages 55 to 65 have a greater risk of becoming sick; have a
      weakened connection to work-based health insurance, and face high premiums
      in the individual insurance market. This three-part initiative would: (1) allow
      Americans ages 62 to 65 to buy into Medicare, through a premium designed so
      that this policy is self-financed; (2) offer a similar Medicare buy-in to displaced
      workers ages 55 and over who have involuntarily lost their jobs and health care
      coverage; and (3) give retirees 55 and over whose retiree health benefits have
      been ended access to their former employers' health insurance. A proposal
      such as this would be minimally necessary for any serious consideration of


                                             15
                                                                      rds Management System
                                                        Automaed Reco
                                                              t
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
years, which would assist about 300,000 people).

-Health coverage for the temporarily unemployed (FY 1997 and 1998 budgets;
not passed). Because most health insurance is employment based, job changes
put families at risk of losing their health care coverage. Many families do not
have access to affordable health insurance when they are between jobs because
they work for firms that do not offer continuation coverage or cannot afford
individual insurance. The proposal would provide temporary premium
assistance for up to six months for workers between jobs who previously had
health insurance through their employer, are in between jobs, and may not be
able to pay the full cost of coverage on their own. (Costs depend on whether it
is done as a demo (about $2.5 billion over 5 years, which would help about
600,000 people) or nationwide (about $10 billion over 5 years, which would cover
about 1.4 million persons».

- Children's health insurance outreach (FY 1999 budget; not passed and new
policy). By the first anniversary of CHIP, we expect about 45 states to have
CHIP plans approved. These new expansions have great potential to help
uninsured children, but not if families do not know or understand the need for
insurance. Moreover, over 4 million uninsured children are eligible for
Medicaid today. Last year's budget included several policies to promote
outreach, including allowing states to temporarily enrolling uninsured children
in Medicaid through child care referral centers, schools, etc; and allowing States
to access extra Federal funds for children's outreach campaigns. An additional
proposal is to pay for a nationwide toll-free number that connects families with
state eligibility workers. NGA is sponsoring this line for one year only; such a
line is essential for the nationwide media campaign that we are planning to
launch in January with the NGA and America's Promise (Colin Powell's group).
 (Cost: Between $400 and $1 billion over 5 years.)

- Parents of children on CHIP (new policy). Since children who are uninsured
usually have parents who are uninsured, an easy way to target uninsured adults
is to extend eligibility for Medicaid or CHIP to parents of children covered by
these programs. This has been done successfully in some states, through
Medicaid 1115 waivers, and would be a logical next step to covering low-income
adults. (Cost: Depends on the proposal and assumed take-up rates by the
states).

- Optional state coverage expansion through eligibility simplification (new
policy). In the wake of welfare reform, Medicaid eligibility rules have become
even more complex since states must cover people who would have been eligible
for AFDC under the old rules. Additionally, Medicaid law allows states to


                                      16
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




            cover parents but not adults without children --even if they are very poor. This
            proposal would allow states to opt for a pure poverty standard for Medicaid
            eligibility for all people (like we do for children) rather than the old categorical
            eligibility categories. Not only would such an approach simplify the Medicaid
            program for families and states; it would provide an opportunity for significant
            coverage expansion. While any change in Medicaid almost always raises
            concerns amongst some advocates, this proposal would be strongly supported by
            the Governors and advocates such as the Center for Budget and Policy
            Priorities. (Cost: Depends on the proposal and projected coverage expansion
            take-up rates).

            -Voluntary purchasing cooperatives (FY 1997, 1998, and 1999 budgets; not
            passed). Workers in small firms are most likely to be uninsured; over a quarter
            of workers in firms with fewer than 10 employees lack health insurance
            -almost twice the nationwide average. This results in large part because
            administrative costs are higher and that small businesses pay more for the same
            benefits as larger firms. This proposal would provide seed money for states to
            establish voluntary purchasing cooperatives. These cooperatives would allow
            small employers to pool their purchasing power to try to negotiate better rates
            for their employees. (Cost: about $100 million over 5 years).

     3. Increase the Indian Health Service budget. In order to reach more of the targeted
     population, we should provide a significant increase to the IHS budget in order to
     address areas such as substance abuse, elder health care, injury prevention, domestic
     violence and child abuse, and sanitation facilities.


     HOMELESS

     1. Homeless Veterans. The National Coalition of Homeless Veterans estimates that there
     are as many as 275,000 homeless veterans on any given night. According to the
     Department of Veterans Affairs, an approximately $60 million increase in funding
     would constitute the single largest investment into breaking the cycle of homelessness
     among veterans. This proposal would seek to increase residential alternatives,
     community-based contracted care, job preparation activities, stand down activities
     (community-sponsored events that conduct one-stop service delivery programs for
     homeless veterans), the distribution of clothing, and long-term housing. The VA
     estimates that this proposal would positively impact approximately 100,000 to 150,000
     veterans annually.

     2. Allow VA to sell surplus property with 10 percent of proceeds going to homeless
     veterans. OMB proposes to amend the Property Act of 1949 to create a 5-year pilot
     project for the VA to sell off property with 10 percent of the proceeds going to local


                                                   17
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion




            homelessness projects under the McKinney Act (with this 10 percent being earmarked
            for homeless veterans) and the other 90 percent going to the VA for capital funds
            (buildings, equipment, infrastructure, but not staff). Currently, the way the law
            works is that all the proceeds from surplus property goes to homelessness, but this has
            not provided an incentive to the agencies to sell property because they do not get to
            keep any of the proceeds. OMB states that since 1989, only one piece of property has
            been sold under this provision. OMB will be circulating their proposal within a
            couple of weeks. OMB would propose to permit V A to sell 25 pieces of property, but
            does not have a cost estimate yet.

            3. Homelessness Demonstration Project Modeled after T ANF. Funds could be set aside
            in the FY2000 budget to create a demonstration project so that one state, region, or
            locality could try to move persons from homelessness to self-sufficiency. The
            demonstration project should set up performance goals similar to T ANF so that there is
            a measure of how many persons have been made self-sufficient. There could be a
            performance bonus for the demonstration project if the goal of the project is met.

            4. Medicaid Outreach Project for Homelessness. A Medicaid outreach project could be
            set up, similar to the CHIP outreach project, that would reach out and cover homeless
            persons. We should develop a cost estimate to determine that, over time, dollars would
            be saved if persons are treated under Medicaid rather than on an as-needed basis in
            emergency rooms and clinics. This idea could be expanded to reach out to more than
            simply the homeless population to include all groups who are Medicaid-eligible.



        TOBACCO

        1. Tobacco Counteradvertising. Fund a $200 million per year tobacco counteradvertising and
        education Campaign, as proposed in the President's 1999 budget and McCain legislation. This
        campaign would develop counteradvertising and purchase enough media time to reach teens at
        least four times a week. The campaign would also fund an extensive school-and
        community-based anti-tobacco education campaign.

        2. Industry Documents. As the result ofthe President's directive, we expect to receive a plan
        from HHS in October outlining how to make tobacco industry documents more accessible to the
        public. Follow up work will be needed to implement this plan. While we can probably secure
        some private funding for this purpose, it is likely that federal funding will also be needed.

        3. Tobacco Cessation. Each year, 20 million smokers attempt to quit, but only 1 million, or 5
        percent, succeed. More than 90 percent smokers who attempt to quit do so on their own, and the
        vast majority fail within 2 to 3 days. However, research shows that effective cessation methods
        could raise success rates to 10-20 percent (over 2 million people annually). The Agency for


                                                          18
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
proven to be effective in helping people to quit: gum, patch, nasal spray, inhaler, and pill (Zyban).
 A full course ofthese treatments costs around $200-300 (for a three months supply, without
counseling). However, less than half of managed care organizations provide coverage of any
AHCPR-approved therapies, and those that provide coverage may impose cost-sharing
requirements that hinder access to treatment. In fact, a study of managed care in Washington
State found that eliminating copayments for smoking cessation services significantly increased
participation rates.

These proposals to help current smokers quit could be coupled with our continued call for
comprehensive legislation to stop children from smoking before they start. Total combined cost
of all these initiatives: $855 million over 5 years. We could make a series of proposals, some
part of the budget and some not: (1) Fall--announce new DOD anti-tobacco plan, and new DOL
and OPM tobacco-free workplace programs; (2) Winter --propose Medicaid and Veterans
coverage of cessation benefits through FY2000 Budget; and (3) Spring --tax coverage of cessation
as a medical expense and expanded coverage of cessation benefits in FEHBP.

       · New Department of Defense anti-tobacco plan. This plan is still being vetted at the
       agency but will likely include covering over-the-counter nicotine replacement therapies
       under military health care coverage as part of a comprehensive military-wide anti-tobacco
       plan. Cost: $60 million per year.

       · Anti-tobacco workplace initiatives by DOL and OPM. DOL could expand its
       drug-free workplace initiative to provide information to employers on steps they can take
       to reduce tobacco use among employees (cost: $63,000 per year). OPM could
       disseminate a model workplace cessation program for all federal agencies (agencies
       would use existing appropriated funds).

       · Medicaid coverage. Currently, smoking cessation prescription and non-prescription
       drugs are optional state benefits under the Medicaid statute. We could propose to require
       states to cover cessation, as the McCain bill did (CBO estimated cost: $120 million over 5
       years, HCFA estimated $114 million). Alternatively, we could propose an enhanced
       federal matching rate for smoking cessation treatments, in order to offer the states an
       incentive to cover these services. The Hansen-Meehan bill establishes a 90 percent match
       rate for state costs of smoking cessation services at an estimated cost of about $110
       million over 5 years. Currently, 23 states cover Zyban, 6 states cover non-prescription
       treatments, and 5 states cover cessation counseling. A study by the Center on Addiction
       and Substance Abuse at Columbia University found that over 42 percent of Medicaid
       recipients smoke, as compared to 25 percent of the general population and that nearly 10
       percent of all Medicaid hospital days are attributable to smoking.

       · Veterans. We should re-propose the plan from the President's 1999 budget which
       created a new discretionary program open to all veterans who began using tobacco


                                                19

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
      services (currently less than 15 percent of veterans receive their health care through the
      VA system because of statutory limits --veterans must be low income or have a
      service-related injury.) The VA would contract with private sector entities to furnish
      AHCPR-approved services to interested veterans. OMB estimates that this proposal
      would cost $87 million for the first year, and $435 million over 5 years. Thirty-six
      percent of the 25 million veterans in this country smoke.

       eTax Treatment. Currently, the cost of cessation treatment cannot be claimed as a
       deductible medical expense because the IRS does not recognize smoking or tobacco
       addiction as a "disease." The IRS has indicated in written opinions that an official
       medical authority classification of smoking as a disease would allow cessation to deduct
       these expenses. Treasury is interested in pursuing this in 1999. This would be done
       outside of the budget.

      e Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. We could require enhanced coverage of
      smoking cessation services. One option is to raise coverage limits to more accurately
      reflect the cost of AHCPR-approved treatments, and to raise the number of treatments
      allowed per lifetime to account for the fact that the average smoker requires three to five
      cessation attempts before they successfully quit (i.e., require coverage of $300-400 per
      treatment, with three maximum treatments covered per lifetime). Another option is to
      waive the deductible and copayment requirement for cessation benefits. Currently
      FEHBP fee for service plans, which cover 70 percent of beneficiaries, are required to
      provide only $100 in smoking cessation benefits. Generally, this coverage does not kick
      in until after the calendar-year deductible has been met, and most plans restrict benefits to
      once per lifetime. Many plans only cover prescription drugs. HMO coverage of
      smoking cessation benefits varies greatly. This would be done outside of the budget, but
      would have to occur in the spring as part ofOPM's annual letter to contracting plans,
      establishing the terms for the following year of coverage.

In addition to these efforts, any Medicare prescription proposal (see above) should include
coverage of prescription cessation agents.

4. Expanded SAMHSA Survey. As the result of the President's directive, HHS will be
including questions in their National Household Survey on Drug Abuse regarding
brand-specific use of tobacco. This will allow us to determine which brands are most
popular among youth, and help us identify which companies may be marketing to this
population. Some federal funding will be necessary to support this expanded effort.

WELFARE

1. Helping the Hardest-to-Employ Get and Keep Jobs.



                                               20
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

 Extend Welfare-to-Work Grants and Strengthen Focus on Fathers. Funding for the $3
 billion grant program that the President fought for in the Balanced Budget Act ends in FY
 1999. These funds are targeted at the hardest-to-place welfare recipients, and
 non-custodial parents of children on welfare, and at concentrated areas of poverty. 75% of
 the funds are allocated to states, who in turn pass them to local Private Industry Councils
 and 25% ofthe funds are available on a competitive basis. We expect DOL to propose
 extension of the grant program in their FY 2000 budget proposal. We should consider
 revising the statutory language to increase the focus on increasing employment of fathers.
 While there is a significant level of interest in serving this population, there is likely more
 we could do to increase the quantity and quality of services. This should also increase
 support from the Ways & Means committee as Shaw is very interested in fatherhood issues.
  Possible approaches include requiring states and communities to designate a minimum
 portion of WTW formula funds for fathers, setting aside a portion of competitive grant
 funds for this purpose, or earmarking funds for needed technical assistance and capacity
 building on this relatively new area. Other changes worth considering: shifting more funds
 toward competitive grants, increasing tribal set aside (currently 1%), and streamlining data
 collection requirements. Assuming level funding, this would cost $1.5 billion annually.

        · Request Additional Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers. We are unlikely to get
        the full 50,000 housing vouchers requested for FY 99. This approach continues to
        have merit, both in helping families move from welfare to work and as a catalyst for
        changing the way local housing authorities, and HUD, do business. Cost to fully fund
        50,000 vouchers is $283 million. Some, including Deich and Edley, have also
        suggested allowing housing authorities to convert Section 8 vouchers that are turning
        over to the more flexible approach of the WTW vouchers.

        · Invest in Increasing English Language and other Literacy Skills. There is
        evidence that those with low education levels have a harder time leaving welfare.
        There is also emerging evidence that English language may be a barrier for some
        minority welfare recipients, including immigrants. We may want to explore
        whether there is more the federal government could do to increase access to ESL and
        other basic education that is combined with work, though this does not necessarily
        have to be done with TANF funds. We need to first explore what is available,
        whether there are successful models that can be replicated, and what the demand is.

 2. Helping New Workers Succeed in the Workforce/Achieve Self-Sufficiency.
 There are several ways to ensure people moving from welfare to work can get to their jobs:

        · Request full $150 million authorized for Access to Jobs    for FY 2000 (TEA-21 set
        guaranteed funding from the Highway Trust Fund at $60        million for FY 2000).
        This would allow DOT to fund more competitive grants.        Note these funds can be
        spent on current and former welfare recipients, as well as   families up to 150% of
        poverty so they help the working poor as well.


                                              21
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

        · Donate surplus federal vehicles to welfare to work programs. These could be
        given, leased, or sold to current and former welfare recipients for whom public
        transit it not a viable option, including those living in rural areas. Cars could be
        allocated through community-based organizations or intermediaries. This could be
        modeled after the initiative to donate federal computers to schools.

        · Help former welfare recipients access funds to purchase cars. In some areas,
        public transit is not a viable option for a family moving from welfare to work. In
        addition, owning a car is something many poor families aspire to, and something that
        helps them become part of the economic mainstream. Family Services of America,
        and other organizations, currently offer revolving loans for low income families to
        purchase cars. FSA's model currently operates in 20 sites and is scheduled to
        expand to 60 sites later this Fall, with partial funding from foundations and private
        financial institutions. They are also seeking federal funding to help with this
        expansion. Possible sources include: HUD, Treasury, DOL WTW grants, as well as
        existing federal and state T ANF funds. Another option is to expand allowable uses
        of IDAs to include purchasing a car needed to go to work.

        · Connection between TANF and Unemployment Insurance. There is growing
        interest in exploring the relationship between these two systems. Historically, few
        welfare recipients have qualified for VI, and some have essentially used AFDC as a
        form of unemployment insurance. As more welfare recipients joining the labor
        force, we need to consider the most appropriate way to provide income support to
        them between jobs. Various approaches include: (a) changing rules of the UI
        system that make it hard for former welfare recipients to qualify for UI once they go
        to work and in the event they lose a job and (b) creative uses of federal T ANF or
        state MOE funds to provide income support to people in between jobs. Either
        approach should be accompanied by a strong effort to promote job retention and
        rapid re-employment. This could be considered as part of a more comprehensive VI
        reform initiative that NEC has been considering, but it would not depend on that.
        NOTE: NGA has a grant to explore this issue and several states are trying innovative
        approaches. While we do not have to frame the issue in terms of planning for
        economic downturns, it seems prudent to address this issue earlier rather than later.

        · Optional State Coverage Expansion Through Eligibility Simplification (see Health section).


        eTransitional Medicaid. Families can currently receive Transitional Medicaid for
        up to 12 months after leaving welfare, but only about 20 to 30 percent of eligible
        families are enrolled. The program has many procedural hurdles that make it more
        difficult to access than regular Medicaid coverage and the 12 months transitional
        period is too short for many families. The budget could eliminate some of the

                                                22
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

        current prescriptive reporting requirements now in the law (that, for example,
        requires families to report earnings in the fourth, seventh, and tenth months of
        coverage and divides the 12 months of coverage into two 6 month segments with
        different co-pay and benefit rules) and allow states to provide a full 12 months of
        coverage without regard to changes in family circumstances, similar to the 12-month
        option for children that was adopted in the Balanced Budget Act. In addition, the
        budget could provide states the option of extending transitional Medicaid to 24 or 36.
         These ideas need to be fully discussed, vetted, and costed out. The current
        program reauthorization sunsets in 2001.

        eExtend the Work Opportunity Tax Credit and Welfare-to-Work Tax Credits
        (WOTC has already expired and WTW will expire in 1999).


 DISABILITY POLICY

 1. Expanding the Defense Department's "CAP" program. The Defense Department's
 Computer Accommodations Program ("CAP") purchases equipment for DOD employees
 with disabilities to allows them to keep working if they become disabled, or for new
 employees just joining the workforce. By using a central $2 million fund for such
 purchases, individual offices do not have to bear the cost within their own budgets, and are
 less likely to be deterred from hiring a person with a disability. CAP is also able to get
 better prices on equipment through its bulk purchases and expertise. It has a showroom to
 help employees tryout appropriate adaptive devices (CAP makes the decision on what
 equipment is purchased, not the employee). It has provided over 9,000 accommodations
 since its inception in 1990. This program is a good example of how employers and
 employees are taking advantage of new (and increasingly cheap) technology, such as
 computers for the blind that talk and listen, and alternative computer keyboards for people
 with dexterity problems, that allow people with disabilities to work. Expanding the
 program has the strong support of the Administration's appointees with disabilities, in
 particular for Tony Coelho, chair of the President's Committee on Employment of People
 with Disabilities.

 Defense has estimated that it would cost $8 million a year to expand CAP government-wide,
 but this is likely overstated since CAP now serves the entire Defense Department for $2
 million a year. A more realistic range is $2 -5 million a year. While having DOD perform
 this service for all federal employees is a bit unusual, they have a great deal of expertise at
 this task and they are ready to take on the added responsibility.

 2. Tax Credit for Disability Related Expenses. [See "Health" section, above.)

 3. New BRIDGE grant program. This program would provide incentives for state and local
 agencies and private organizations to form interdisciplinary consortiums of service


                                              23
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




     providers (employment, health, transportation, etc.) to better assist people with disabilities
     in going to work. NEC and DPC will receive revised proposal shortly from the President's Task
     Force on Employment of People with Disabilities and will evaluate and vet. Estimated cost for
     this three-year grant program is $150 million a year.

     4. Information and Communication Technologies for People with Disabilities. NEC has
     developed draft proposals now being vetted to ensure that new technologies will be designed from
     the beginning to be accessible to people with disabilities. Ideas include leveraging federal
     government procurement, investing in R&D, funding industry consortia, training the next
     generation of engineers, etc. (Tom Kalil is working on this, coordinating with DPC and OMB).

     NATIVE AMERICANS

     1. Create Native American Program at the Army Corps of Engineers. The Anny Corps has
     a modest $2 million proposal that would institutionalize Native American outreach within the
     Anny Corps. Here is the proposal:

            · Outreach ($1.5 million). Market engineering, environmental, economic, project
            management, real estate, and resource management services to Tribes.Using existing
            workforce of 150 cultural-historical-Tribal specialists for support, establish Tribal
            Coordinators (I per Corps of Engineers Division, 8 Divisions).Establish an Indian Desk in
            Corps Headquarters to work with Tribes, BIA, Corps districts (37) and divisions (8), and
            other federal agencies to leverage resources/programs .

            · Training ($250,000). Complete consultation guidelines. Complete Commander and
            senior leader video on Tribal matters. Develop a strategy for empowering Tribes nthe
            areas of regulatory and natural and cultural resource management.

            .Partnerships ($250,000). Explore watershed planning opportunities with Tribes.Link
            to Clean Water Action Plan Activities.Develop model MOUs that can be used with Tribal
            Governments on strategies, protocols, and processes for addressing issues.


     CRIME AND DRUGS

     1. Crime Bill II. While the 1994 Crime Act is set to expire at the end of FY 2000, we should
     get ahead of the crime debate by including an outline of Crime Bill II in next year's budget that
     emphasizes and builds on key Clinton crime initiatives. This includes: extending COPS;
     establishing community-based prosecutors, courts, and corrections; promoting targeted deterrence
     for guns, gangs, etc.; funding drug testing and treatment for all persons under criminal justice
     supervision; reauthorizing VA W A; creating police youth academies; and other new crime
     programs.



                                                   24
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

       OMB has already built $4.8 billion into the base for continued crime funding over the next 5
       years, but this only includes $400 million of the $1.4 billion we have been spending on COPS and
       continued funding for other popular crime bill programs (i.e., V AWA, prisons, federal law
       enforcement, etc.). Thus, to keep crime bill funding at its current level --and to allow us more
       flexibility in proposing new programs --we will need $1 billion more in the FY 2000 budget.

       2. Expansions of Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII). This year it looks as
       though we will succeed in getting $28 million in funding for President's YCGTT initiative to trace
       all crime guns and hire more ATF agents to crackdown on gun traffickers in 27 cities. We
       should follow-up in the FY 2000 budget by expanding the YCGII to all cities with populations of
       more than 250,000. This would cost about another $35 million. NB: Currently, treasury is only
       planning to propose adding another 10 cities in next year's budget..

       3. Expand Values-Based Initiative. At a minimum, we should seek funds in FY 2000 to
       continue the Administration's values-based crime prevention initiative in 16 cities --as well as to
       expand it to another 20 to 30 cities. This would only take about $5 to $10 million annually and
       could come from Crime Bill II funds if necessary. More importantly, however, we should
       propose changes to existing crime prevention and drug treatment programs to ensure that
       faith-based organizations are allowed to participate --and that common sense values are included.

       4. Drug Treatment Parity. A long overdue policy change that we should consider embracing
       in this year's budget is to require health insurers to guarantee some type of meaningful substance
       abuse coverage --much akin to what the Administration supported for mental health benefits.

       5. School Shooting Response Fund. In our recent meeting with the communities impacted by
       multiple school shootings, one of the key recommendations made by all of the local leaders was
       that the federal government should establish an emergency fund that would allow communities
       that are overwhelmed by multiple victimizations to have the resources they need to facilitate the
       short-and long-term response. This includes year-long support for increased security and
       enforcement, investigations, media response, additional counselors, and other such costs.


       CONSUMERS

       1. Consumer Bill of Rights. A consumer bill of rights could address a number of areas such as
       enforcement, notice to consumers, and dissemination of information. We could announce this
       bill of rights as a package, but then pull out separate pieces for separate events like we do in the
       Patients' Bill of Rights area. We could include a number of different areas such as the following:

              · Auto Insurance Fraud. Auto insurance fraud is a $13 billion-a-year problem in
              America. We could propose significant funding for a Justice Department anti-auto
              insurance fraud. Since an estimated 13 percent of auto-insurance premiums go to pay for
              fraud, we could claim that this effort will help drive down auto-insurance premiums.


                                                       25
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
consumers' telephone bills, and slamming, the unwanted switching of long-distance
telephone service from one carrier to another, and are the top two respective complaints
reported to the National Fraud Infonnation Center in 1998. In 1997, the FCC received
more than 20,000 complaints from customers who were slammed. So far, the FCC has
fined slammers, announcing a $5.7 million fine this year, and announced voluntary
guidelines for cramming that local telephone companies say they will follow. We could
add money for enforcement to the FCC and/or DOJ. In May, the Senate overwhelming
passed legislation that would impose new penalties on slammers and would eliminate
common slamming methods, such as contest entry fonns that, when signed by
unsuspecting customers, authorize a switch of their long-distance carriers.

-Telemarketing Fraud. Telemarketing fraud is among America's worst white-collar
crimes, robbing unsuspecting victims of an estimated $40 billion per year. We could
increase the FBI budget to increase investigations ofthis type of fraud. Recently, the
Washington Post reported that volunteers from the American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP) work undercover for the FBI, posing as potential victims to catch
telemarketers on the prowl. Because telemarketing fraud often is targeted against the
elderly, we could combine this piece with the elder abuse in a separate event.

-ATM Proposal. Weinstein proposes that Treasury publish an annual report on
       consumer financial issues, including ATM fees. In each report, Treasury would
provide a list of insured financial institutions based on geographic divisions and by size.
Treasury would report on the following categories: (1) Fees charged to depositors at
ATMs at their home branches; (2) Fees charged by institutions to depositors using other
banks ATMs; (3) Fees charged by ATM networks; (4) ATM fees charged to non-member
depositors by institutions; (5) Minimum deposit requirements for checking and savings
accounts; (6) Fees for overdrafts; and (7) Checking account fees. We will need to
develop categories which underscore the differences in types of accounts. If we just list
checking account fees, the fees that aren't reported would increase.




                                                           Automated Records Man
                                        26                 H                     agement System
                                                            eX-Dump Conversion


