RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-SEP-1998 16:25:43.00

SUBJECT:   Edley memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP   [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Overall this looks better than the earlier version, which was pretty
decent itself.  Here are some points you should keep in mind:

The 3 pillars he proposes are ok--it reflects the input Bruce and I gave
him.

Close the gap in opportunity and achievement
 With respect to the Education Bill of Rights, I don't think it has the
right elements.
Suggested additions:  smaller classes, safe schools, after-school programs
(and extra help for kids who need it), choice among good public schools,
and 21st century technology.
Suggested deletions:   (1) English acquisition and Post-secondary
attainment, because these are both achievement outcomes. They don't
belong in a "bill of rights", they are instead statements of the kind of
achievement we want. A "bill of rights" ought to be about the learning
opportunities that must be available on a universal basis, not about the
particular results we want to achieve for kids.
Need clarification: what does parenting and early childhood mean? I
assume access to preschool programs, but I'm not sure what Chris means by
parenting.

This section also needs to contain a discussion about achievement--both
about what we want kids to achieve (standards, postsecondary education)
and what it means to "close the gap" with respect to achievement.   Closing
the gap should mean that the education outcomes we value--math
achievement, college attendence, English language proficiency--should not
be predicted on the basis of racial or ethnic background. While there
will always be variation in performance levels and in postsecondary
educational attainment, this variation will not be dependent on race.   If
this isn't stated clearly, it will be (mis) interpreted as meaning that
everybody should achieve at the same levels, a proposition that lacks
credibility.

Accountability and Responsibility
This is basically good, though there are two points lurking in the section
on governance and leadership to keep in mind:
To the extent that school finance equity is still on Chris' agenda (even
though its no longer in the memo)--part of the governance changes that
could be considered in an effort to achieve equity is complete state
governance and financing of K-12 education, along with the elimination of
local school boards. This would make it a lot easier to equalize finance,
and probably a lot easier to make other needed improvements in the
schools.  It would also set off a firestorm.  I wish I had a better idea
of whether Chris intended to push in this direction, because it would be


useful to have guidance from POTUS if he does.
There is also a federal role issue here--one that is included in the
discussion questions list.  This book could be a place to make the
case--to be followed up in our policy proposals--that the continuing
issues of race together with the growing importance of education to all
means that the federal government ,must playa larger role in education in
the next century than it has in the past. This could become an
opportunity to make the case for national standards, for some uniformity
in learning opportunities, and for the federal government to pick up a
larger share of the cost for K-12 than we do now.   It could also provide
an opportunity if he wanted, to distinguish between what must be done
nationally (e.g., national standards for teachers and students) and what
must be done federally (e.g., pay for building schools, smaller classes,
more equitable distribution of funds, etc.)    There has not been a really
good, thoughtful national discussion of these issues.   The President could
probably frame them very well, and I would be ok i f POTUS "athorizes some
rethinking of the long-term federal role ... "
~...   ....

