RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael T. Schmidt ( SCHMIDT_MT )     (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAR-1996 13:37:43.09

SUBJECT: Seminole and Indian Gamiong

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:29-MAR-1996 13:44:52.59

 TEXT:
 I have been told that you are working on the Supreme Court's
 recent Seminole ruling and our response to that ruling.    I wanted
 to pass on some information to you that I hope will be helpful.
 This morning, I was over at John Duffy's Office (DOl -- Counselor
 to Babbit and Indian Gaming Guru) and took part in a very informal
 discussion of this issue with John, Jim Simon (DOJ) , and some
 other agency folks. (I apologize for not letting you know about
 this meeting, but before today I didn't realize you were working
 on the issue!)   Nothing much came from this meeting, just
 some brainstorming over possible options that the Admin can chose
 from in dealing with the Indian Gaming side of the Seminole
 Decision.   It is my understanding that the Departments of Justice
 and Interior will be meeting more formally on Monday to discuss
 this issue and agency (and Administration) reaction to the issue.
 Both DOJ and DOl expressed great interest in having someone from
 WH Counsel attend.   Included in this meeting may be some
 discussion about a possible press release -- I am not sure about
 this, but I asked John Duffy over at Interior to make sure he ran
 any public statement from DOl by the WH before releasing.    You may
 be interested in attending this meeting -- if so, call Bob
'Anderson (Solicitor's Office DOl) at 208-7404, or Craig Alexander
  (DOJ Office of Tribal Justice) at 514-9080 for time and place.   I
 think that a number of DOJ shops will be at the meeting, not just
 OTJ.
 I will be out of town from this afternoon until Tuesday night.
 Due to my lack of a skypager, I have left a contact number with WH
 Operator if you need to reach me before I get back. Also, Pat
 Romani (Carol Rasco's assistant) has these numbers as well.
 Hope this helps!


