RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris   ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-SEP-1998 23:06:55.00

SUBJECT:   Draft of Friday's ed speech in Chicago--comments back ASAP please

TO: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 9/23/98 11.00 pm
Paul Glastris
REMARKS BY PRESIDENT
WILLIAM J. CLINTON
AT JENNER ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
CHICAGO, IL
September 25, 1998



Acknowledgments: Mayor Richard Daley; Sec. William Daley; Chicago School
Board Ch. Gery Chico; Chicago schools CEO Paul Vallas; Jenner principal
Sandra Satinover; tk tk

        ID,d like to talk to you today about my abiding faith that public
schools in America can and will be made dramatically better. It is a faith
that I confess is not universally shared. There are many who believe that
public education is in a permanent and irrevocable state of decline.

        Yet when I was elected president six years ago, I recall many of
those same people believed that the whole country was in a permanent
decline--or at least that there was nothing government could do to help.
Look around you today. America is back. We have the lowest unemployment
rate in 28 years, with 16.7 million new jobs; the lowest crime rate in 25
years; the smallest percentage of people on welfare in 29 years; the
lowest African American poverty rate since statistics have been kept; the
lowest inflation in 32 years; the highest home-ownership in history; and
in just tk days, for the first time in 29 years, all that red ink on the
government's budget will turn to black.

        How did all this happen? Because the American people worked hard,
and because we in Washington worked hard, too, to give the American people
the tools they needed to improve their lives.   We cut taxes for 15 million
hard-working families through the earned income tax credit. We increased
the minimum wage to give 10 million Americans a well deserved raise.   We
fought for 'and won the biggest increase in children's health care in more
than three decades. We expanded the Head Start program to help our
children get off on the right foot.   We made it possible for nearly 2
million more women and infants to get the nutritional care they need.
 i.




With the Family and Medical Leave Act, we gave millions of people the
chance to take time off from work to care for an ailing parent or bond
with a newborn child. We opened the doors of higher education with the
HOPE Scholarship, with more Pell Grants, with tax credits for all higher
education, with the deductibility of student loans.  We created more than
100 empowerment zones and enterprise communities, established community
development banks, doubled small business loans to minorities and tripled
them to women. When people wanted to scrap affirmative action we said:
mend it, don't end it. We banned the importation of assault weapons, put
more police on the streets, and expanded prevention efforts to help keep
kids out of trouble.

        Like you, weD,ve worked hard to make this a better country, and
like you, weD,ve prayed hard, too. And the Lord has been kind. He has
blessed us with a stronger economy, stronger communities, and stronger
families.
        But our efforts cannot slacken just because things have gotten
better. When the Lord gives you the good times you prayed for, He does not
mean it as an invitation to stop going to church.

        We must redouble our efforts especially to make sure every America
child, regardless of race, ethnicity, or income, has access to the finest
public elementary and secondary schools in the world. ThatD,s a demanding
agenda, but we live in demanding times. In the new information economy,
prosperity goes to countries with the best-educated workforces. We have no
choice but to do more.

        We must do more to promote the kind of actions that have made
Jenner Elementary School a better center of learning. Twice as many
students at Jenner are reading at grade level this year than last. One
reason for that dramatic improvement is the extra help these children have
been given by extraordinary group of volunteer tutors. I want to extend my
personal thanks to those volunteers. I also want to thank WITS, the
non-profit group that organizes these volunteers, as well as the corporate
entities such as EVEREN Securities, which not only donate money to this
effort, but allow their employees time off to help these children.

        I believe we in Washington should also do our part to support
efforts like WITS, and I am cautiously optimistic that we will. Right now,
members of my.administration are working with leaders in Congress on a
measure that could mean federal dollars for WITS and other volunteer child
literacy efforts.  I applaud that spirit of bipartisanship, and I hope
Congress will pass a bill before the end of the congressional session, so
that its impact will be felt very soon,  right here at Jenner School.

        But letD,s be honest. No one program, all by itself, can seriously
improve a complex enterprise like American public education. The tutoring
helped here at Jenner. But so did a dozen other actions. Scores are up at
Jenner, in part because attendance is up. And attendance is up in part
because of a new safety program in which parents and volunteers escort the
children to and from school. The truth is, there is no magic pill to cure
what ails the schools. But a number of pills, taken all at once, will
work. That is the lesson of Jenner. That is the lesson of school reform in
Chicago. That is the lesson incorporated in my education agenda. And that
is the lesson Congress must learn, by passing my each and every item of my
education agenda, all at once, now.

         Chicago schools are working better not because the mayor tried
one idea, then another, then another; but because the mayor. and Gery Chico
and Paul Vallas took a range of bold actions, all at once. They required
 ,.


school uniforms. They cracked down on truancy. They wrote tough new
academic standards. They ended social promotion. They put under-performing
schools on probation and reconstituted others with new principals and
faculty.

        Now, if youD,re going to raise the basketball hoop, as Rev. Jesse
Jackson says, you better make sure the players have gym shoes. Mayor Daley
has not only raised the hoop, he provided new gym shoes. He raised
standards, but also offered support for students to meet those standards.
Chicago schools noe provide academically-enhanced summer school classes to
struggling students; enriched afterschool care to children with working
parents; preschool for the very young; even training for parents before
children are even born.

        Students wonD,t come to school if they feel unsafe. Chicago
schools today are safer inside and out. Students wonD,t respect
themselves, or their school, if the schools look as if no one respects
them. Today, over a third of Chicago schools have been newly renovated,
and every window in every school now gets cleaned at least once a year.

        By doing all these things simultaneously, the Chicago schools, once
considered hopeless, have begun to turn around. Reading and math scores
are up. Attendance and graduation rates are up. And, interestingly, the
schools with the most comprehensive reforms have done the best. Of the
first 40 schools that raised standards and began offering afterschool
tutoring and a hot dinner to poor students who need it, 39 have shown
dramatic gains in student learning.

        If Chicago can do it, America can do it. ThatD,s why, earlier this
year, I submitted to Congress an education agenda that has all the
components that have worked in Chicago, plus others that would benefit
Chicago. In my education agenda, I call for more responsibility, more
accountability, tougher standards--and more opportunity for students and
teachers to meet those standards. I call for smaller classes in the early
grades with the help of 100,000 new teachers. I call for voluntary
national tests for 4th grade reading and 8th grade math. For schools that
agree to end social promotion, I call for help in providing afterschool
~nd summer school to students who need it. I call for safer schools
through more partnerships with local law enforcement. I call more charters
schools; more training and certifying of master teachers; and better
rewards for our most committed teachers. I call for every classroom and
school library to be hooked up to the Internet by the year 2000. I call
for a child literacy program to provide enough tutors so that every child
in America can read a book independently by third grade. I call for tax
breaks that will help fund the construction of 5000 new schools.
 [modernization of old schools?] And I offer a way to do all this within
the balanced budget, without touching a dime of the surplus.

        Yes, this is an ambitious agenda. But it can all be done. And it
must all be done simultaneously if we are to seriously improve public
education in America.

        Unfortunately, Congress is moving forward on only one of these
agenda items: child literacy. I am grateful for that help. But Congress
must do much more. To save AmericaD,s public schools, Congress must act on
my entire agenda, all at once, now, before the congressional session ends
and the moment of opportunity slips away.

        with a better-educated workforce, we can continue the economic
prosperity that has made America the envy of the world. Yet instead of
 ,0




acting on my education agenda, Congress has been fiddling with tax cuts
that will drain the surplus before it even shows up on the governmentO,s
books. That could put at risk the fiscal discipline that has given us our
prosperity. Instead of risking the economy, Congress right now could be
saving public schools, strengthening the environment; passing campaign
finance reform and a real patients bill of rights.

        America needs Congress to act now, on the right priorities. And if
Congress wonO,t, America needs a new Congress. YouO,11 all have a chance
to make that happen in November.

Thank you and God bless you.


