RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-SEP-1998 17:13:19.00

SUBJECT:    2nd revision of Agriculture letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett      CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Kate P. Donovan/OMB/EOP on 09/24/98
05:10 PM ---------------------------




           Kate P. Donovan
           09/24/98 05:12:08 PM

Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject: 2nd revision of Agriculture letter

The veto statement in the 3rd paragraph was revised as an outcome of
today's meeting on the Hill.  Please make sure this is okay with you (the
rest of the text is identical to previous versions circulated). We aim to
send the letter by 7pm tonight.  Thank you.

The Honorable Bob Livingston
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations'
u.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C.  20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:

 This letter provides the Administration's views on H.R. 4101, the
Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Bill, FY 1999, as passed by the House and by the
Senate. As the conferees develop a final version of the bill, your
consideration of the Administration's views would be appreciated.

 The Administration welcomes congressional efforts to accommodate the
President's priorities within the 302(b) allocation.  The President's FY
1999 Budget proposes levels of discretionary spending for FY 1999 that
conform to the Bipartisan Budget Agreement by providing savings through
user fees and certain mandatory programs to help finance discretionary
spending.  In the Transportation Equity Act, Congress -- on a broad,
bipartisan basis -- took similar action in approving funding for surface
transportation programs paid for with mandatory offsets.  In addition,
this year, as in the past, such mandatory offsets have been approved by
the House and Senate in other appropriations bills.  We want to work with
the Congress on mutually-agreeable mandatory and other offsets that could


be used to increase high-priority discretionary programs in this bill.   In
addition, we urge the Congress to consider again the user fee proposals
included in the President's budget, either adopting or modifying them to
enable more resources to be directed to important initiatives such as
those proposed for food safety, nutrition programs, rural development,
agriculture research, and conservation.

 It is our understanding that the conferees intend to include emergency
agricultural disaster assistance in this bill.   It is essential that the
conferees approve income based assistance consistent with the PresidentO,s
September 22nd proposal and the Daschle/Harkin plan. We also strongly
urge the conferees to disapprove the unacceptable House provision that
would prohibit FDA from using funds for the testing, development, or
approval of any drug for the chemical inducement of abortion. If the bill
presented to the President includes the unacceptable FDA language, and
agricultural disaster provisions that provide inadequate indemnity
assistance or are inconsistent with the Daschle/Harkin proposal, his
senior advisers would recommend that he veto the bill.   We look forward to
working with you to resolve these concerns.

Food and Drug Administration

 The Administration strongly opposes the unacceptable House-passed
provision that would prohibit FDA from using funds for the testing,
development, or approval of any drug for the chemical inducement of
abortion.  The determination of safety and effectiveness is the
cornerstone of the consumer protection established by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act and must continue to be based on the scientific
evidence available to FDA.  Prohibiting FDA from reviewing applications
for particular products could deprive patients of new therapies that are
safer and more effective than those currently approved. Additionally,
this provision could conceivably put women at risk because it might allow
clinical trials of such drugs to proceed without FDA supervision.

 In addition, the Administration strongly urges Congress to provide the
full $1,251 million in resources to fund the program level proposed for
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the President's budget.   The
Administration is deeply' disappointed and concerned that neither the House
nor the Senate has funded the President's request for FDA's tobacco
enforcement activities. This funding is vital to the Administration'S
plan to reduce youth smoking.   Failure thus far to pass comprehensive
tobacco legislation should not prevent the Congress from providing
adequate resources for these critical public health activities.

Food Safety Initiative

 The Administration is deeply concerned that neither the House nor the
Senate has fully funded the President's request for Food And Drug
Administration (FDA) and USDA activities to enhance food safety, providing
only $16.8 million and $68.9 million, respectively, of the $96 million the
President has requested for these activities. American consumers enjoy
the world's safest food supply, but too many Americans get sick, and in
some cases die, from preventable food-borne diseases.  The President's
initiative would expand food safety research, risk assessment
capabilities, education, surveillance activities, and food import
inspections. The Administration will work with Congress to explore
options to offset the additional cost needed to fully fund the President's
request.

Disaster Assistance



 It is of critical importance that the Federal Government provide
emergency funds to farmers facing the worst agricultural crisis in a
decade.  On September 22nd, the Administration submitted its request for
$2.3 billion in emergency assistance, including supplemental crop
insurance indemnity payments, additional farm operating loans, and other
vitally important programs.  In addition to this request, Secretary
Glickman communicated the AdministrationD,s support for income assistance
to farmers for low commodity prices through Senators Daschle and Harkin." s
proposal to remove the cap on marketing loan rates for 1998 crops.   This
is clearly the superior approach for providing emergency assistance to
those facing crashing commodity prices this year.  The Administration
strongly urges the Congress to provide sufficient and appropriate
assistance to address this urgent crisis.
Women, Infants, and Children

  The President requested a funding increase in the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) , to reflect
inflation adjustments and projected increases in participation.   Based on
new data indicating declining food package costs and stable WIC
participation, it now appears that the Senate or lower House funding level
will be sufficient to support the revised 7.4 million year-end
participation level going into FY 1999. We commend the House and Senate
for their hard work on this issue and if the conferees approve the House
level, we urge that the additional resources in the Senate bill be
reallocated to priorities detailed in this letter.

Civil 'Rights

 The President is personally committed to righting any wrongs committed by
USDA employees in years past. Therefore, the Administration strongly
supports the provision passed in both the House and the Senate that waives
the statute of limitations for individuals who have previously filed a
discrimination claim against USDA.  The Administration prefers the Senate
version because it applies to both USDA farm and housing loans.

 However, in a number of areas, the House and Senate have reduced funds to
assist the most needy farmers and residents of rural communities.  Neither
the House nor the Senate has provided the requested increase for the
outreach for Socially Disadvantaged Farmers program, which was a key
recommendation of the USDA Civil Rights Action Team (CRAT) report last
year. with the additional $7 million requested, USDA could support 35
projects to assist 10,000 small family farms and stem the decline in the
number of minority farmers and ranchers.  We urge the conferees to provide
the full request.

 The CRAT report also recommended increasing the amount of farm ownership
loans, a portion of which are targeted to minority and beginning farmers.
The Administration urges the conferees to provide an additional $3 million
requested for this program by the President, which would permit another
290 limited-resource farmers to finance real estate purchases.

Rural Development Funding

 The Administration strongly objects to the provision in both bills that
blocks FY 1999 spending in the mandatory Fund for Rural America. The Fund
provides additional resources for rural development and innovative
agricultural research that are vitally needed to improve the quality of
life in rural America and increase the productivity of U.S. farmers.
congress created the Fund in 1996 to boost the overall Federal investment


in these activities, not as a source of savings to offset discretionary
spending.  Moreover, Congress recently extended the authority for the Fund
and increased its resources. The Administration urges the conferees to
strike this provision.

 In addition, the Senate bill does not fully fund the President's request
for the Rural Community Advancement Program (RCAP) , under-funding direct
loans for water and wastewater and for community facilities.  These loans
provide the community infrastructure to improve the quality of life of
rural Americans, and they often finance the vital ingredient for
diversifying the rural economy.  The Senate bill would fund 35 fewer water
and wastewater facilities, serving 50,000 rural residents, as well as
fewer rural health clinics, police and fire stations, and health care
facilities than the President's request.  We urge the conferees to adopt
the House position, but to strike the House language that would limit the
flexibility of USDA to transfer funds among programs, in order to allow
the program to operate as intended and permit resources to be tailored to
meet unique local needs.

Agriculture Research

 Both the House and Senate have included over $50 million in unrequested
earmarks for low-priority research while funding competitive grants
through the National Research Initiative (NRI) at $30 million and $35
million, respectively, below the President's request.  Rejecting
additional funds for competitive research grants for national and regional
priorities in favor of earmarked grants for local interests fails to
support the highest priority needs of American agriculture and consumers,
and the Administration urges the conferees to reverse this policy.   We
also believe that the conferees should reduce the unrequested increases in
the Agricultural Research Service's buildings and facilities program and
redirect these resources to higher priority programs.

 The Administration strongly objects to the House's elimination of the
$120 million in competitively-awarded research funds authorized in the
Agricultural Research, Extension and Education Reform Act of 1998.  These
funds would finance vital investments in food and agricultural genome
research, food safety and technology, human nutrition, and agricultural
biotechnology. We urge the conferees to support these important research
efforts by restoring funds to the level requested.

Climate Change and Clean Water Initiatives and Conservation Programs

 Neither the House nor the Senate has provided the $7 million increase
requested for research to support the Administration's Climate Change
Technology Initiative. These funds would support high-priority research
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions caused by agricultural practices,
develop improved feedstocks that can generate energy, and improve
techniques to convert agricultural products to biofuels.  The
Administration urges the conferees to restore funding to the requested
level.

 In addition, neither the House nor the Senate has included the
Administration's requested increase of $23 million for the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) to implement the President's Clean
Water Action Plan to help State and local organizations hire watershed
coordinators, document baseline conditions, and target resources to
farmers requesting assistance.  The Plan, developed by USDA and EPA,
outlines a strategy on how to correct water quality problems, including
polluted run-off, across the Nation. The Administration urges the


conferees to provide these necessary funds to the NRCS.

 The Administration strongly opposes House and Senate actions reducing or
eliminating funding for several key mandatory USDA conservation programs,
including the Environmental Quality Incentives Program, Wetlands Reserve
Program, wildlife Habitat Incentives Program, and Conservation Farm
Option. These programs are essential for enhanced water quality, wildlife
habitat, and soil conservation on American farms and throughout rural
America and should be adequately funded.

Language Provisions

 The Administration strongly objects to the House provision that would
provide funding for research on nutrition programs within the Economic
ReSearch Service.  Research on nutrition programs should occur in the
context of the program's administration, and the Administration urges the
conferees to provide funding for these activities within the Food and
Nutrition Service, as requested and as included in the Senate bill.

 The Senate bill purports to prohibit USDA personnel from preparing or
submitting appropriations language regarding unenacted user fees unless
the budget also identifies additional spending reductions should the user
fees proposals not be enacted by an identified time.  The Justice
Department advises that this provision would violate the Recommendations
Clause of the Constitution under which Congress can neither require nor
prohibit that the President make legislative or policy recommendations to
congress.  Because the funding restriction would undermine the President's
ability to fulfill his constitutional duty under the Recommendations
Clause, it would be unconstitutional.

 The Administration objects to the provision in the House and Senate
versions of the bill that would limit Executive Branch review of USDA
responses to congressional inquiries. The Administration urges the
conferees to delete these provisions.



 The Administration objects to a Senate provision that would prohibit the
FDA from consolidating laboratory operations.   The proposed consolidation
offers the opportunity for better efficiency and mission coordination, and
it is part of FDA's overall streamlining goals.   The Senate provision
would force FDA to spend funds on infrastructure that could otherwise be
used more directly to protect public health. The Administration urges the
conferees to drop this provision.

 The Administration objects to section 741 of the House-passed bill that
would allow Federally tax-exempt financing in conjunction with rural
multi-family housing guarantees. Guarantees of tax-exempt obligations are
an inefficient way of allocating Federal credit.  Assistance to borrowers,
through the tax exemption and the guarantee, provides interest savings to
the borrower that are smaller than the tax revenue loss to the Government,
and the cost to the taxpayer is, therefore, greater than the benefit to
the borrower.

 The Administration objects to the addition of Title XI to the Senate
bill, would amend the alternative-fuel provisions of the Energy Policy Act
of 1992.   The amendment makes numerous changes to definitions and
compliance credits, with the nominal intent of increasing demand for
"biodiesel" -- a fuel derived from oil seeds such as rapeseed.   The real
effect, however, would be to gut most of the existing alternative-fuel


requirements and policies. The amendment creates loopholes that would
allow Federal agencies and other fleet operators to ignore, effectively,
most alternative fuels, such as ethanol, natural gas, and electric
vehicles. These loopholes would be easier for Federal agencies to exploit
than for many private or State fleets.  If the Energy Policy Act is to be
amended, such action should be pursued through the energy authorization
committees.

Other Issues

 The Administration urges the conferees to provide additional funds for
the farm labor housing program to improve the living conditions of many
farm labor families.  The House and Senate levels, $20 million and $16
million, respectively, are more than 35 percent below the Administration'S
request and would result in at least 230 fewer housing units being built
compared with the request. The Administration urges the conferees to
increase funding to assist these needy members of our society.

 The House reduces by $10 million and the Senate by $20 million the
President's request for the mandatory Emergency Food Assistance Program
(TEFAP), which purchases commodities for individuals greatly in need of
assistance. Given reported increases in need for food assistance through
food banks and soup kitchens, the Administration is concerned that this
reduction from the authorized level would mean less food will reach the
most vulnerable Americans.  In addition, food rescue and gleaning is a
priority area that deserves additional funding in the USDA budget. The
budget proposes $20 million for this initiative to encourage greater
private sector and community based involvement in food rescue.

 Under the 1996 Food Quality and Protection Act, USDA has added
responsibilities to assist EPA with its re-registrations of pesticides and
to develop new technologies for integrated pest management systems.  Both
bills fail to provide the requested additional funding to meet these
urgent needs and, as a result, re-registrations may be based on incomplete
understanding of actual pesticide use and exposure, jeopardizing the
continued viability of current crop production patterns.

 The House has provided only $2 million of the requested $22 million
increase for the Inspector General as part of the Administration'S law
enforcement initiative, and the Senate has not provided any of the
requested funds.  The USDA initiative would save taxpayers millions of
dollars lost through fraud in the food and nutrition programs as well as
in USDA disaster, multi-family housing, and other programs. The
initiative would also improve the integrity of many USDA programs. The
Administration urges the conferees to increase funds for this important
initiative.



 We look forward to working with the conferees to address our mutual
concerns.

Sincerely,




Jacob J. Lew
Director




Identical Letter Sent to The Honorable Bob Livingston,
The Honorable David R. Obey, The Honorable Joseph Skeen,
and The Honorable Marcy Kaptur, The Honorable Ted Stevens,
The Honorable Robert C. Byrd, The Honorable Thad Cochran,
and The Honorable Dale Bumpers



Message Sent
To:
Kev~i-n~S~.~M~o-r-a-n-/7W~H==O~/~E~O~P~@~E~O~P~---------------------------------------

John Podesta/WHO/EOP@EOP
Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP@EOP
Leslie Bernstein/WHO/EOP@EOP
Mindy E. Myers/WHO/EOP@EOP
Martha Foley/WHO/EOP@EOP


