RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-SEP-1998 17:05:56.00

SUBJECT:   tnr editorial on race commission

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
In case you missed it ...

Feeling Findings

 Everyone was too busy reading the Starr report to notice it, but in a way
the report issued by the
 Advisory Board to President Clinton's Initiative on Race was even more
damning of this presidency.
 The race commission was ginned up months before anyone had even heard of
Monica Lewinsky,
 back when the president's legacy was uncertain and he still entertained
notions of leaving an
 unblemished one. But his commission's report succeeds only in expounding
stale, softheaded
 rhetoric.

 The report is a deeply pessimistic document. It dwells on America's
"history of oppression,
 conquest, and private and government-sanctioned discrimination." It
bemoans "the framework of
 racial hierarchy, discrimination, and domination with which we now
contend as a Nation." While the
 race commission pays lip service to the notion that America has made
impressive progress in
 remedying its racial problems, it finally deems those problems "seemingly
intractable." Even the
 report's optimistic and laudable title, "One America in the 21st"
Century," is undercut by a footnote
 essentially apologizing to those who take offense at such a notion.

 Of course, the race commission can strike these pessimistic notes because
very little of the report
 deals with facts. The heartening story of racial progress--borne out by
data showing marked
 increases in income and education levels for minorities over the past 40
years--goes largely untold.
 Instead, the race commission focuses on Americans' feelings about race,
which are inherently fuzzy
 and subjective. "[Ilt was hearing the personal experiences that had the
most effect on us," the report
 remarks. Indeed, at times the report reads like the minutes of a 15-month
encounter group.
 Personal experiences elicited in panel-sponsored "conversations" are
presented like little nuggets of
 wisdom, even when, as wisdom, they are somewhat dubious.

 Rather than challenge those who maintain that America's racial situation
has not changed


 meaningfully over the past 40 years, the report coddles them. It notes
that most whites believe that
 race relations in America have dramatically improved while at the same
time observing that most
 blacks and Hispanics disagree. But, as to who is right, the commission
ventures no judgment. Just as
 the Kerner commission excused the riots of the mid-1960s by blaming white
racism for all of the
 ghetto's ills, clinton's race panel implicitly assents to views on race
that are simply out of sync with
 reality.

 Not surprisingly, the commission's only new and concrete policy idea is
the creation of a permanent
 race commission to continue the vaunted dialogue that produced such a
bumper crop of feelings.
 But more talk is certainly not the answer to solving what remains of
America's racial problems. The
 remaining barriers to racial equality--like faltering public schools,
poor job skills, and self-defeating
 cultural attitudes--are stubbornly immune to officially sponsored group
therapy.

 (Copyright 1998, The New Republic)
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 038 - FOLDER -005


[09/28/1998]
