RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [' OPD

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-SEP-1998 19:27:19.00

SUBJECT:   Alien smuggling

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/o=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/o=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
I attended an NSC meeting this afternoon re: alien smuggling and, in
particular, how we (the federal government) can better handle situations
where boat loads of Chinese are found off the western coast.  These
migranst sometimes head for Mexico (from where they will be smuggled to
the U.S.) and sometimes head for the U.S.  Thus, it is a law enforcement
issue for both countries.

The only immigration issue discussed was whether INS's expedited removal
procedures could be adapted to better handle boat loads of Chinese. Under
the current system, a person who arrives in the country without proper
immigation papers is immediately deported, unless that person can make a
threshold claim of asylum.  The DOJ and INS have worked hard to make this
process as fair as possible and have erred on the side of making the
threshold showing fairly low. The DOJ believes that, in general, the use
of a low threshold works well to carry out its mandate to deport easy
cases and detain for investigation border-line cases.  DOJ and INS
strongly support how expedited removal is being implemented.

However, b/c of this low threshold and a recent change in the law that
allows credible fear of persecution to be established based on the birth
control policies of the mirgrant's home country, more than 90% of Chinese
who arrive on boats are able to make the necessary threshold showing;
thus, only a small percentage are quickly deported.

The State Department has asserted that our credibility in asking for
greater cooperation from Mexico on this issue requires that we take
greater steps to make the necessary changes in our laws so that the
Chinese can be repatriated expeditiously from the U.S.  However, DOJ does
not think that there are regulatory or legislative changes that they would
recommend.

However, DOJ is going to take a stab at it. They are preparing an options
paper on what regulatory changes could be made to make expedited removal
work better for Chinese arriving on boats, without making it worse for the
vast majority of immigrants to whom it applies.  We should get this in a
couple of weeks.

Julie


