RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-SEP-1998 09:43:30.00

SUBJECT:   Updated Accomplishments Documents

TO: Essence P. Washington ( CN=Essence P. washington/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I       )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP    [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I        )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: TanyaE. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP     [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I          )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I       )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ UNKNOWN I        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Julie A. Fernandes   ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD· I    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( Leanne A. Shimabukuro @ EOP @ LNGTWY         [OPD I )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO)    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( Christa Robinson @ EOP @ LNGTWY    [OPD))
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays ( Cathy R. Mays @ EOP @ LNGTWY    [OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
09/30/98 09:42 AM ---------------------------




Robin J. Bachman
09/29/98 08:52:50 PM
Record Type:       Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      Rajiv Y. Mody/WHO/EOP, Glen M. Weiner/WHO/EOP, Michael V.
Terrell/CEQ/EOP, Matt Gobush/NSC/EOP
Subject:         Updated Accomplishments Documents

These have been revised.    please share with your colleagues and any other
interested party.

THANKS TO EVERYONE WHO HELPED IN THE EFFORT TO UPDATE THESE DOCUMENTS!




[I've updated these will the new income and poverty info so they have
changed from last week's set.)



ON THE LABOR DOC, I hope to have it done this week, probably Thursday.

Robin
66237




Message Sent
To:
Ann------~~~--~----------~----------------------------------
    F. Lewis/WHO/EOP
Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
Robert B. Johnson/WHO/EOP
Jocelyn Neis/WHO/EOP
Jena V. Roscoe/WHO/EOP
Sean P. Maloney/WHO/EOP
Barbara ~. Barclay/WHO/EOP
Eli G. Attie/OVP @ OVP
Alejandro G. Cabrera/OVP @ OVP
Beverly J. Barnes/WHO/EOP
Christopher J. Lavery/WHO/EOP
Kevin S. Moran/WHO/EOP
Chandler G. Spaulding/WHO/EOP
Maritza Rivera/WHO/EOP
Joseph C. Fanaroff/wHO/EOP
Stacie Spector/WHO/EOP
Thomas D. Janenda/WHO/EOP
Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
Brenda B. Costello/WHO/EOP
Noa A. Meyer/WHO/EOP
Jonathan Orszag/OPD/EOP
Brian A. Barreto/OPD/EOP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS EXT: [ATTACH.D34]MAIL43429527X.226 to ASCII,
 The following is"a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CEOE0000010A02010000000205000000915800000002000005DD915C979A47E55AB790
6237A97330FF1CBC349FC27BBA6BE2DECC979097362B0321C798C97EE1E59A659F6F6C6E250412
FED79499B9C6F4F0872E35C5E36703FC98FA75710B54CA7E6517DAEC300469C94A7D6D2BOFE350
                             American Families Are Better Off Today
                                Than They Were Six Years Ago

        Over the last six years, President Clinton and Vice President Gore have led America in
preparing for the 21 st Century wi th a new vision of government -- a government that does not
attempt to do everything, nor a government that withdraws to the sidelines. The accomplishments of
the Clinton-Gore Administration are giving Americans the tools to realize their potential; providing
opportunity while demanding responsibility; and building One America in which all are challenged
to serve.


Economv: the Strongest Economy in a Generation

Balanced the'Federal Budget-- in 1992, the budget deficit was $290 billion, a record dollar
high. This year, the budget will be in surplus for the first time in 30 years.

Nearly 17 Million New Jobs -- more new jobs in 5 Y2 years than were created during the entire 8
years of the Reagan Administration (16.7 million under Pres. Clinton vs. 16.0 million under Pres.
Reagan).

Fastest Real-Wage Growth In More Than Two Decades -- after adjusting for inflation, wages
have increased 2.5% in the past 12 months -- the fastest real wage growth in more than two decades.

Lowest Unemployment in Nearly Thirty Years -- down from 7.5% in 1992 to 4.5% today.

Highest Homeownership Rate in History -- there are more than 6.5 million new homeowners since
the President took office.


Families: Strengthening America's Working Families

$500 Per-Child Tax Credit -- 26 million families with 40 million children will receive the $500
per-child tax credit.

Tax Cuts for Working Families -- 15 million working families receive tax relief through the
President's expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit.

Largest Four-Year Drop in Child Poverty Since 1960s -- Under President Clinton, the child poverty
 rate has declined from 22.7 percent to 19.9 percent   -- that's the biggest four-year drop in nearly 30
.years (1965-1969).

Increased the Minimum Wage from $4.25 to $5.15 per hour -- increasing wages for 10 million
workers.

Protecting Families -- Family Medical Leave allows workers to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
already benefited from FMLA since its enactment.

Signed Landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act -- this law will help thousands of children
waiting in foster care move more quickly into safe and permanent homes.

Putting Families First -- put in place first-ever plan to protect our children from tobacco.
Required the installation of V-chips in all new televisions. Encouraged schools to adopt school
uniform policies to deter school violence and promote discipline. Produced guidelines on religious
expression in public schools.


Education: Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years

Making 13th & 14th Grades as Universal As High School-- making the first two years of college
universally available with $1,500 HOPE Scholarship credits.

Expanding College Opportunity with Tuition Tax Credits, Education IRAs, and Largest
Increase in Pell Grants in 20 Years -- 20% tax credit helps offset tuition costs for college or
lifetime learning. The expanded IRA allows penalty and tax-free withdrawals for education. Nearly
4 million students will receive a Pell Grant of up to $3,000, 30% larger than when the President
took office.

Making College More Affordable -- cut student fees and interest rates on all loans, expanded
repayment options including income contingent repayment, and improved service through the
Direct Loan Program.

Paying for College Through Community Service -- this year, nearly 50,000 young people will
take advantage of the opportunity to pay for college (or repay student loans) by performing
community service through AmeriCorps.

Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade -- more than 1000 colleges have committed
work-study students to tutor children in reading, and thousands of AmeriCorps members and senior
volunteers are organizing volunteer reading campaigns. In addition, the President is working to
enact an early literacy bill such as the America Reads Initiative that will provide more tutors after
school, improve the teaching of reading in our schools, and help parents help their children learn to
read.

Striving for Excellence with National Education Standards -- seeking high national standards
for all students, the President has proposed a first-ever national test in 4th grade reading and 8th
grade math.

Preparing for the 21st Century with Greater Education Technology -- created the Technology
Literacy Challenge Fund to help connect every classroom to the Internet by the year 2000, increase
the number of multimedia computers in the classroom, provide teachers with technology training,

                                                   2         Automated Records Management SYS\l:OI
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
worth over $2.5 billion every year) for schools, libraries, rural health clinics and hospitals to connect
to the Internet.

Expanding Choice and Accountability in Public School-- supported increase of public charter
schools, from only one charter school in the nation in 1993 to more than 1,000 charter schools this
year.

Providing Early Education to More than 830,000 Children with Head Start -- now reaching
more kids than at any time since its creation in 1965 and 200,000 more children than in 1992.


Crime and Drugs: Lowest Crime Rates in Nearly 25 Years

Putting 100,000 New Police on the Street -- resulting in a nearly 20% increase in our nation's
police force. At this time, almost 80,000 new officers have been funded.
250,000 Felons, Fugitives and Stalkers Denied Handguns -- since the President signed the Brady
Bill into law.

Banned 19 of the Deadliest Assault Weapons and Their Copies -- keeping assault weapons off
our streets.
Developed Comprehensive Anti-Drug Strategy Including $195 Million Anti-Drug Youth
Media Campaign -- appointed four-star General Barry McCaffrey to be the nation's Drug Czar.
Strengthening and expanding the Safe and Drug-Free Schools program.


Health Care: Increasing Access for Millions of Americans

Protected Medicare -- protected, modernized and extended the Medicare trust fund for at least a
decade while offering new options for patient choice and preventive care.

Enacted Single Largest Investment in Health Care for Children since 1965 -- the $24 billion
Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) will provide health care coverage for up to five
million children.

Passed Meaningful Health Insurance Reform -- signed the KassebaumlKennedy Health Care Bill
which limits exclusions for pre-existing conditions, makes coverage portable and helps individuals
who lose jobs maintain coverage.

Raised Immunization Rates to All Time High -- 90% of toddlers in 1996 received the most
critical doses of each of the routinely recommended vaccines -- surpassing the President's 1993
goal.

Ensuring Safe Food for America's Families --making food safety a priority. Issued new standards
to reduce and prevent contamination of meat, poultry, and seafood; signed the Food Quality

                                                   3
                                                                  Automated Records 'Management Sy,ki
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
fruit and vegetable juices; and created a President's Council on Food Safety which will develop a
comprehensive food safety strategic plan for federal agencies.


Welfare Reform and CommunitvEmpowerment: Largest Drop in the Welfare Rolls in History

5.7 Million People Are Off Welfare Today -- a more than 40% decrease from 1992 and the largest
decline in the welfare rolls in history. Between 1996 and 1997, the number of people who were on
welfare in one year and working in the next year increased 30% to 1.7 million people. The
President signed the landmark welfare reform law to require work, impose time limits, and
dramatically expand child care spending.

Nearly 70% Increase in Child Support Collections -- signed into law the toughest child support
crackdown in history.

New Incentives to Move People from Welfare to Work -- the Balanced Budget included $3
billion to move long-term welfare recipients into jobs and a tax credit for employers.

New Funding to Help People Get to Work -- the Transportation Equity Act for the 21 st Century
authorizes $750 million over five years for the President's Access to Jobs initiative and reverse
commute grants to help communities design innovative transportation solutions so that families who
need to work can get to work.

Expanded Investment in Urban and Rural Areas -- by creating over 120 Empowerment Zones
and Enterprise Communities and expanding access to capital.


Environment: New Standards to Protect Our Environment for the Future

Issued Toughest New Air Quality Standards in a Generation -- issued new air quality standards
for smog and soot that will prevent 15,000 premature deaths a year and improve the lives of millions
of Americans who suffer from respiratory illnesses.

Cleaning Up Toxic Waste Sites and Redeveloping Brownfields -- cleaned up twice as many
Superfund sites in less than six years as previous administrations did in twelve. The Brownfields tax
incentives have leveraged nearly $1 billion for redevelopment of industrial sites and created over
2,000 jobs.

Providing Safe Drinking Water -- proposed and signed legislation to strengthen the Safe Drinking
Water Act to ensure that our families have healthy, clean tap water.

Reducing the Threat of Global Warming -- negotiated an international treaty to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in an environmentally strong and economically sound way. Proposed a
five-year $6.3 billion package of tax incentives and research investments to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions through energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.

                                                 4
                                                             Automated Records Management Sy ..
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
and private lands, from the red rock canyons of Utah to the Florida Everglades. Reached
agreements to protect Yellowstone from mining and save the ancient redwoods of California's
Headwaters Forest.


Foreign Policy: World's Strongest Force for Peace. Freedom and Prosoerity

Ratified NATO Enlargement -- ensuring a more stable, democratic Europe and a fully-integrated
Russia.

Brokered Peace In Northern Ireland -- ending decades of bloodshed.

Secured Peace In Bosnia -- by brokering the Dayton Peace accords, sending peacekeepers to the
region, supporting democractic institutions, providing for refugees and bringing war criminals to
justice.

Restored Democracy in Haiti -- ending military dictatorship and stopping the flow of refugees to the
United States.

Protecting Americans from Weapons ofMass Destruction -- by dramatically reducing Russian and U.S.
nuclear arsenals through START treaties; ridding Ukraine, Belarus and Khazakstan of nuclear
weapons; extending indefinitely the Non-Proliferation Treaty; and signing the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty.

Combatting Terrorism -- by striking at terrorists in Afghanistan and Sudan, increasing international
cooperation and giving law enforcement new and stronger tools.

Opening Markets Abroad to Create Jobs at Home -- by negotiationg over 240 free-trade agreements,
including NAFTA and GATT.

Secured Ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention -- banning the production, stockpiling, and
use of chemical weapons.

Led Efforts to Rid the World of Land Mines -- eliminating non-self-destructing mines from our
arsenals, seeking alternatives to self-destructing mines by 2006 and devoting more resources to
removing existing mines than the rest of the world combined.

Addressing New Threats to National Security -- from biological weapons and cyber-terrorism by
protecting our critical infrastructure, strengthening our ability to respond to attacks and enforcing
international treaties.

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                   5           Hex-Dump Conversion
traffickers.

Strengthened Relations with China -- engaging its leaders in ground-breaking human rights dialogue.

Containing Saddam Hussein -- through diplomacy backed by force.

Persuaded North Korea To Freeze Its Dangerous Nudear Weapons Program.

Leading International Efforts To Address Global Economic Crisis -- and stimulate worldwide growth.

Leading Force For Peace In The Middle East -- in mediating the Oslo peace process.

Saved Mexico From Economic Disaster -- by providing financial relief.

Improved Partnerships With Africa -- through historic Presidential trip to Ghana, Uganda, Rwanda,
South Mrica, Botswana and Senegal.


Science and Technology: Leading America into the Next Millennium

Historic Investments in Biomedical Research -- increased funding for the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) in critical research areas, such as cancer, the Human Genome Project, HIV / AIDS and
heart disease.

Building the Next Generation Internet -- now connecting more than 100 universities at speeds
that are 100 to 1,000 times faster than today's Internet and developing the next generation of
applications, such as telemedicine.

Ensuring U.S. Leadership in Space, Science and Technology -- increasing investments in science
and technology for five years in a row, while bringing down the deficit. Continuing to support
exploration of space including the.Mars Pathfinder mission.

Ensuring the Nation's Security --Instituted a science-based program to maintain the safety and
reliability of the U.S. nuclear deterrent without the need for nuclear testing, enabling the President
to be the first world leader to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.

                                                                                                     9/98




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   6
                                     American Families Are Better Off Today
                                        Than They Were Six Years Ago
ECONOMY:    The Best American Economv In A Generation
Nearly 17 Million New Jobs ... more new jobs in 5 Yz years than were created during the entire 8 years of the Reagan
Administration (16.7 million under Clinton vs. 16.0 million under Reagan).
First Budget Surplus in 30 Years ... from a $290 billion deficit in 1992, to an OMB projected $39 billion surplus in 1998 -- the
first budget surplus since 1969.
Lowest Unemployment in 28 Years ... down from 7.5% in 1992 to 4.5% today -- its lowest level in 28 years.
Fastest Real-Wage Growth in More Than Two Decades ... after adjusting for inflation, wages have increased 2.5 percent in the
past 12 months -- the fastest real-wage growth in more than two decades.

CHILDREN AND EDUCATION:        Greatest Investment in Children's Health & Education in 30 Years
Extended Health Care to Millions of Children ... $24 billion to provide meaningful health care coverage to millions of children
included in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act --the single largest investment in health care for children since 1965.
$500 Child Tax Credit For 26 Million Families with 40 Million Children ... included in the Balanced Budget Act.
200,000 More Kids in Head Start Since 1992 ... now reaching more kids than at any time since its creation in 1965.
Leading a Crusade For Voluntary National Education Standards ... so that by 1999, every 4th grade student will be tested in
reading and every 8th grade student will be tested in math.
Increasing Charter Schools from One to 1,000 ... offering parents choice within the public school system.
Making College More Affordable ... by increasing Pell Grants by 30% from $2,300 in 1993 to $3,000 in 1998 and offering
flexible repayment options and better service through the Direct Lending Program.
Biggest Single Increase in Higher Education since the G.I. Bill. The Balanced Budget Act included the HOPE Scholarship
and other tax deductions, putting college within reach for millions -- the largest overall higher education investment in 30 years.

CRIME:   Crime Rates Are Down To The Lowest Levels In A Generation
Violent Crime Down 6 Years in a Row ... the longest period of decline since 1960. Juvenile crime, which had been exploding,
has declined 2 years in a row. Property and violent crime rates are at their lowest levels in nearly 25 years.
Putting 100,000 New Police on The Street...resulting in a nearly 20% increase in our nation's police force. Nearly 80,000 new
officers have been funded.
250,000 Felons, Fugitives and Stalkers Denied Handguns ... since the President signed the Brady Bill into law.
Developed Comprehensive Anti-Drug Strategy ... and appointed a four-star general as Drug Czar. Expanding the Safe and
Drug-Free Schools Program and a new $195 million anti-drug youth media campaign is attacking the youth drug problem.

WELFARE:     Largest Drop In Welfare Rolls In History
5.7 Million People Have Left Welfare ... over 40% decrease from January, 1993 and the largest decline in history. The President
signed landmark welfare reform legislation in 1996 requiring work, imposing time limits and dramatically expanding child care
spending. And in both 1997 and 1998, the President won changes to the law on protections for legal immigrants and children.
Nearly 70% Increase in Child Support Collections ... as a result of the toughest child support crackdown in history.

ENVIRONMENT:      Protecting Our Environment For Future Generations
Cleaned up Twice as Many Superfund Sites in less than 6 Years as Previous Administrations Did in 12.
Safer Food, Drinking Water and Air ... because the President fought for and signed the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Food
Quality Protection Act and issued new standards to cut toxic poliution from chemical plants by 90%.
Ensuring Cleaner Air for Our Children ... by approving strong new clean air standards for soot and smog that will prevent
15,000 premature deaths a year.        .                                                                                         09/98
                                                                         Automated Records Management Systen
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                     Working on Behalf of African Americans


                                               ECONOMY


Balanced the Federal Budget. In 1992, the budget deficit was $290 billion, a record dollar high.
 This year, the budget will be in surplus for the first time in 30 years.

Saving Social Security First.       President Clinton is committed to saving Social Security for the 21 st
Century. The President will fight any attempt to break the budget rules and drain the surplus. His
commitment is unwavering: every penny of any future surplus must be reserved until a bipartisan plan
to save Social Security is enacted.

Nearly 17 Million New Jobs. Under President Clinton, more new jobs have been created in 5 Y2
years than were created during the entire 8 years of the Reagan Administration (16.7 million under
Pres. Clinton vs. 16.0 million under Pres. Reagan).

Declining Unemployment. The unemployment rate for African Americans has dropped from 14.1
percent in January 1993 to 9.0 percent today -- one of the lowest African American unemployment
rates on record.

The Lowest Inflation in More than 30 Years. Since 1993, the inflation rate has averaged just 2.5
percent -- the lowest average inflation rate since the Kennedy Administration. Over the past year, the
Consumer Price Index has increased only 1.6 percent.

Strong Private Sector Growth. The private sector of the economy has grown 3.9 percent annually--
the fastest rate of private-sector growth since the Johnson Administration.

Median Income of African American Households Is Up $3,354. The median income of African
American households rose 4.3 percent (or $1,029) last year. And since 1993, the median income of
African American households has increased from $21,696 to $25,050 -- $3,354 or a IS-percent
increase, adjusted for inflation, between 1993 and 1997.

Tax Cuts For Low-Income Working Families. President Clinton's 1993 Economic Plan provided
tax cuts to 15 million hard-pressed working families by expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC). The average family with two kids who received the EITC received a tax cut of $1 ,026. In
1997, the EITC lifted 1.1 million African Americans out of poverty.

Largest Four-Year Drop in African American Poverty in More than Twenty-Five Years. Since 1993, the
African American poverty rate has dropped from 33.1 percent to 26.5 percent -- the largest four-year
drop in African American poverty in more than a quarter century (1967-1971) and 26.5 percent is the
lowest level on record (data collected since 1959). While this decrease marks significant progress,
President Clinton will continue to fight for policies that help to raise incomes and reduce
poverty.

                                                                 Automated Records !.,.lanagement System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
American child poverty rate fell from 39.9 percent to 37.2 percent -- its lowest level on record (data
collected since 1959). Since 1993, the child poverty rate among African-Americans has dropped from
46.1 percent to 37.2 percent -- the biggest four-year drop on record.

Minimum Wage Increased. The President raised the minimum wage to $5.15 an hour -- directly
benefitting 1.3 million African American workers.

Fighting for Paycheck Equity. The President has called on Congress to pass legislation to strengthen
laws prohibiting wage discrimination. In 1996, the median earnings of African American women
represented 65 percent of the median earnings for men.

Two and a HalfTimes More Small Business Loans to African American Entrepreneurs.
Between 1993 and 1997 the Small Business Administration (SBA) approved more than 9,000 loans to
African American entrepreneurs under the 7(a) and 504 loan programs. Last year alone, the Small
Business Administration granted 1,900 loans, worth $286 million, to African American small business
owners, two and a halftimes the number ofloans granted in 1992.

Supporting Minority Business Communities and Increasing Access to Capital. Building on the
efforts of the SBA, Vice President Gore unveiled aggressive plans to increase lending and business
services to the African American and Hispanic business communities nationwide. The SBA has set a
goal of providing an estimated total of $1.86 billion in loans to African American small businesses
over a three-year period. In addition, the Vice President announced an unprecedented agreement
between SBA and the "Big Three" U.S. automakers to increase subcontracting awards to
minority businesses by nearly $3 billion over the next three years -- a 50 percent increase over
current levels.

Ensuring Minority Business Owners Have a Fair Opportunity to Compete. The President signed
the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century into law on June 9, 1998. The Act protects the
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Program, a program that ensures that minority and women
owned businesses have an opportunity to compete for transportation projects. The Administration
helped defeat an amendment to the House version of this bill that would have eliminated the DBE
Program. In a different measure, the President also approved the creation of a new program to
target assistance to minority-owned businesses in industries that continue to reflect the effects of
discrimination. As a result, thousands of minority-owned businesses will be able to compete more
effectively for government contracts.

Working on Behalf of Minority Farmers. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is working
to strengthen programs and increase outreach targeted to underserved communities, including
increasing its lending to minority and women producers. In the past five years there has been a 74
percent increase in direct lending to these groups -- from $46.5 million in FY93 to $81 million in
FY97. Additionally, the Administration is committed to righting any past wrongs by federal
employees and has worked with the Congress in crafting language contained in the Agriculture
Appropriations bill that would waive the two-year statute oflimitations on discrimination complaints
against USDA's farm and housing loan programs. This waiver would allow compensation to be

                                                  2               Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Ownp Convel'liion
through the 1990's.

Expanding Access to Capital with Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI). The
President has expanded access to capital through the creation of the Community Development
Financial Institutions Fund, which supports banks and other entities that specialize in lending and
investing in under-served communities. The President's FY99 Budget includes a $45 million
increase in CDFI funding (from $80 million to $125 million) to allow the Fund to provide
additional support for these institutions, including through an expanded training and technical
assistance initiative.

Expanding Investment in Urban and Rural Areas. Thanks to President Clinton and the 1993
Economic Plan, 125 Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities have been created, programs
that are spurring economic development in distressed communities. And the President's FY99
budget provides $150 million a year for 10 years to fund 15 new urban Empowerment Zones
(EZs) and $20 million a year for 10 years to fund five new rural EZs. Additionally, the
President's FY99 budget includes $400 million -- nearly triple the FY98 appropriation -- for a
new Community Empowerment Fund (CEF) that is expected to leverage an estimated $2 billion
in private-sector loans to help communities invest in businesses and create jObs.

Homeownership Is Up. In the last four years, 628,000 African Americans have become new
homeowners.

Expanding Low-Income Housing Tax Credit by 40 Percent. In 1993, President Clinton fulfilled
his promise to permanently extend the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, spurring the private
development of low-income housing and helping to build 75,000-90,000 housing units each year.
President Clinton now proposes to expand the credit by 40 percent. Over the next five years,
this expansion will mean an additional 150,000 to 180,000 quality affordable rental units.

Put Forth a "Play-by-the-Rules" Homeownership Initiative and a Homeownership Zones
Initiative. The FY99 budget proposal for the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation includes
$25 million for a new initiative that would make homeownership more accessible to families who
have a good rental history but have difficulty purchasing a home, 10,000 lower-income and
minority families who are currently renting would benefit from this initiative. In addition, the
President's FY99 budget includes $25 million for Homeownership Zones, abandoned housing
and distressed neighborhoods that communities could reclaim with this funding. Funds could
be used for property acquisition, demolition, site preparation, housing construction or
rehabilitation, homeownership counseling, relocation, and activities to further fair housing and
homeownership.


                               FIGHTING FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY


Building One America. The President has led the nation in an effort to become One America in the
21st Century: a place where we respect others' differences and, at the same time, embrace the common
values that unite us. Dr. John Hope Franklin, Advisory Board Chair, and Rev. Suzan Johnson
Cook served on the Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race, which the President charged


                                                 3           Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
actively involved in public outreach efforts -- including holding numerous public meetings and
town halls -- to engage Americans across the nation in this historic effort. One of the critical
elements of the President's Initiative on Race was identifying, highlighting and sharing with the
nation promising practices -- local and national efforts to promote racial reconciliation. The
Advisory Board presented their final report to the President on September 18, 1998, and
recommended that conversations on race continue.

Creating an Administration that Looks Like One America. The President appointed the most
diverse Cabinet and Administration in history. The Clinton Cabinet includes three African
Americans: Rodney Slater, Secretary of the Department of Transportation; Togo West, Jr., Secretary of
Veterans Affairs and Alexis Herman, Secretary of Labor. Additionally, African Americans serve in
the Administration as Surgeon General, Deputy Attorney General for the Department of Justice,
Director of the National Park Service, Deputy Secretary ofComrnerce, Department of Education
General Counsel and as the Department of Education's Chief of Staff. Thirteen percent of Clinton
Administration appointees are African American, which is twice as many African Americans as any
previous administration. White House appointees include: Bob Nash, Assistant to the President and
Director of Presidential Personnel; Thurgood Marshall, Jr., Assistant to the President and Director of
Cabinet Affairs; Minyon Moore, Assistant to the President and Director of Public Liaison; Cheryl
Mills, Deputy Assistant to the President and Deputy Counsel and Robert (Ben) Johnson, Deputy
Assistant to the President and Deputy Director of Public Liaison.

Increasing the Number of Judicial Appointments. President Clinton has named 12 African
Americans as U.S. Attorneys and 12 African Americans as U.S. Marshals. The President has
nominated over 54 African Americans to the Federal bench, 17 percent of his total Federal bench
nominations.

Ordered an Assessment of Affirmative Action Programs. The President ordered a comprehensive
review of the government's affirmative action programs which concluded that affirmative action is still
an effective and important tool to expand educational and economic opportunity to all Americans.
This review of federal affirmative action programs has helped to ensure that these programs are
fair and effective and that they can survive legal challenges. As a result, programs that benefit
African Americans, including students, working men and women, and business owners, remain
in effect and are more likely to be upheld by the courts.

Increasing Civil Rights Enforcement. On Martin Luther King, Jr., Day, January 19, 1998, Vice
President Gore announced the Administration's proposal for the largest single increase in funding to
enforce existing civil rights laws in nearly two decades. Through new reforms and heightened
commitment to enforcement, the Administration will seek to prevent discrimination before it occurs and
to punish those who do discriminate in employment, education, housing and health care, and against
those with disabilities. The Clinton Administration's FY99 budget contains $602 million for civil
rights enforcement agencies and offices -- an increase of $86 million over last year's funding.
And an additional $1 million will allow the Department of Justice's Civil Rights Division to
enhance coordination of federal civil rights enforcement policy among agencies. Improved
coordination will lead to more consistent enforcement of civil rights laws, broader dissemination
of best practices and improved data collection.


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                  4             Hex-Dump Conversion
cornerstone of the improved civil rights enforcement effort is a $37 million increase (15 percent)
for the EEOC. Through increased use of mediation, improved information technology and an
expanded investigative staff, the EEOC will reduce the average time for resolving private-sector
complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months and cut the backlog of cases from 64,000 to 28,000,
by the year 2000.

Creating a National Memorial to Honor Dr. Martin Luther King. In July of 1998, President
Clinton signed a new measure authorizing the creation of a national monument to Dr. King on
the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

Opposed California Prop. 209 and Similar Measures.   The Clinton Administration strongly opposes
state and local initiatives to eliminate affirmative action programs that expand opportunities for
African Americans and others. The Administration opposed Proposition 209 in California and
filed amicus briefs opposing Prop. 209, which currently prohibits state affirmative action programs.
The Clinton Administration opposed a similar initiative in Houston, which was defeated and is
currently opposing an initiative in Washington that is similar to Prop. 209. In all these cases,
representatives of the administration have spoken out strongly against these initiatives as unfair
and a barrier to equality.

Ensuring Election Fairness.  The Clinton Administration defended racially fair redistricting plans
against claims that they were unconstitutional and prevented election day discrimination against
minority voters and voter intimidation and harassment by monitoring polling place activities in a record
number of states and counties.

Increasing Voter Registration. During 1995 and 1996, the National Voter Registration Act or
"Motor Voter" law registered nearly 14 million new voters and made voting easier for millions more.
Notably, 1996 saw the highest percentage of voter registration since 1960. [FEC, 6/97]

Working for Fair Housing. To respond to the increase in reported cases of serious fair housing
violations, HUD will double the number of its civil rights enforcement actions by the year 2000.
HUD has also committed $15 million to 67 fair housing centers around the country to assist in
fighting housing discrimination this year. In addition, the President's budget proposes $10
million for a targeted enforcement initiative that will use paired testing -- identical applicants of
different races or genders approaching Realtors or landlords -- to detect and eliminate housing
discrimination.

Defended Fairness. The Clinton Administration has filed more cases between 1993 and 1997 to
enforce fair housing laws than any other Administration (more than 500 cases). For instance, this
Administration desegregated a Vidor, Texas, public housing complex and ordered a Mississippi bank
to implement remedial lending plans for minority customers who were unfairly denied loans by the
bank.

Eliminated Discriminatory "Redlining" Practices. The Clinton Administration negotiated
agreements with health care agencies to eliminate discriminatory "redlining" practices denying home
health care services based on residential location.

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                     5          Hex-Dump Conversion
Syphilis Experiment and their families, and directed Health and Human Services Secretary Donna
Shalala to issue a report about how best to involve communities, especially minority communities, in
research and health care. HHS awarded a planning grant to Tuskegee University to help it establish a
center for bioethics in research and health care.

Working to Ensure a Fair and Accurate Census. The Clinton Administration is working to
ensure that Census 2000 is the most accurate census possible using the best, most up-to-date scienti fic
methods as recommended by the National Academy of Sciences. According to the Census Bureau, the
1990 Census missed 8.4 million people and double-counted 4.4 million others. Nationally, 4.4 percent
of African Americans were not counted in the 1990 census. While missing or miscounting so many
people is a problem, the fact that certain groups -- such as children, the poor, people of color, city
dwellers and people who live in rural rental homes -- were missed more often than others made the
undercount even more inaccurate. A fair and accurate Census is a fundamental part of a
representative democracy and is the basis for providing equality under the law. The President is
determined to have a fair and full count in 2000.


                                       CHILDREN AND FAMILIES


Protecting Families. The Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) enables workers to take up to 12
weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing family member without jeopardizing their job.
Millions of workers have already benefited from FMLA since its enactment. The President also
proposed expanding the Family & Medical Leave Act to allow workers up to 24 hours per year of
unpaid leave for parent-teacher conferences or routine medical care for a child.

Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities. President Clinton has announced a $400
million initiative to end racial and ethnic health disparities. The effort sets a national goal of
eliminating the longstanding disparities by the year 2010 in six key health areas: infant
mortality, diabetes, cancer screening and management, heart disease, AIDS and immunizations.
For example, African Americans suffer from diabetes at 70 percent higher rates than white
Americans. The President announced a five-step plan --led by Surgeon General and Assistant
Secretary for Health Dr. David Satcher -- to mobilize the resources and expertise of the Federal
government, the private sector, and local communities.

Focused Health Efforts. Established the Office of the Minority Health Research and Alternative
Medicine at the National Institutes of Health. Helped communities develop culturally-competent
systems for the care of children with serious emotional disturbances through the Comprehensive
Mental Health Services for Children and Families program.

Fighting to Pass a Strong, Enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights. President Clinton has called on the
Congress to pass a strong, enforceable patients' bill of rights that assures Americans the quality health
care they need. The bill should include important patient protections such as: assuring direct access to
specialists; real emergency room protections; continuity of care provisions that protect patients from
abrupt changes in treatment; a fair, timely, and independent appeals process for patient grievances; and
enforcement provisions to make these rights real.

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                   6            Hex-Dump Conversion
Medicare. The Balanced Budget Act extended the life of the Medicare Trust Fund for at least a
decade; expanded choices in health plans; and provided beneficiaries new preventive benefits. The
President has also put forth a new proposal that will provide greater access to health insurance for
Americans ages 55 to 65, including an option to buy into Medicare.

Extended Health Care to Millions of Children with the Children's Health Insurance Program
(CHIP). Because of the President's leadership, the Balanced Budget included $24 billion to provide
real health care coverage to up to five million more children, the largest children's health care budget
increase since Medicaid was created in 1965. Minority children make up a disproportionate number
of the over 10 million uninsured children. African American children make up 25 percent and
Hispanic children make up 30 percent of all uninsured children -- more than twice their percentage of
the overall population. The Administration is actively reaching out to communities to target and
enroll eligible, uninsured children in CHIP.

Increased WIC -- $1 Billion Higher. Under President Clinton, participation in the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) has expanded by 1.7 million
-- from 5.7 million in 1993 to 7.4 million women, infants, and children in 1998, with funding rising
from $2.9 billion to $3.9 billion. The President's budget proposes $4.1 billion in WIC funding to
serve 7.5 million women, infants, and children in 1999, fulfilling his goal offull participation in WIC.
 Research shows that every $1 increase in the prenatal care portion of the WIC program cuts between
$1.77 and $3.90 in medical expenses in the first 60 days following childbirth. In 1996,25 percent of
the infants who benefited from WlC were African American.

Expanded Head Start By Nearly 60 Percent -- Over $1.5 Billion Higher Per Year. Since 1993,
President Clinton has expanded Head Start by 57 percent, from $2.8 billion in FY93 to $4.4 billion in
FY98. Of the estimated 830,000 children now enrolled in Head Start, 36 percent of the children are
African American. The President's FY99 Budget increases Head Start funding by $313 million,
which would mean Head Start funding would be 68-percent higher in 1999 than in 1993. The
President is on track to meet his goal of enrolling one million children in Head Start.

Proposed the Largest Single Investment in Child Care in the Nation's History. The President's
$21 billion child care proposal will give child care subsidies to millions of children and increase
tax credits for three million working families to help them pay for child care.

Providing After-School Opportunities for Up to Half a Million Children a Year. Last year, the
President fought for, and won, a $40 million expansion of the 21st Century Community Learning
Centers program. Building on the success of this program, the President's FY99 budget includes a $200
million major expansion, which will provide safe and educational after-school opportunities for up to
500,000 school-age children in rural and urban communities across the country.


                                              EDUCATION


Made the Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years. Maintaining his longtime commitment to
education, the President enacted the largest investment in education in 30 years -- and the largest
investment in higher education since the G.!. Bill-- by signing the 1997 Balanced Budget Act.

                                                                     Automated Records Management Svsten.
                                                    7                                              J
                                                                     HeX-Dump Conversion
Advisors for Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to strengthen the capacity of
historically black colleges and universities to provide quality education and advised on ways to increase
the private sector's role in these institutions.
Increased Funding and Grants for HBCUs. Increased funding for Historically Black Colleges by
over $250 million between FY92 and FY98 -- an increase of nearly 25 percent. Today, America's 105
HBCUs are educating almost 300,000 African Americans.

AmeriCorps College Support. Since 1993, more than 100,000 people have had the opportunity to
serve through AmeriCorps, with African Americans comprising 20 percent of all participants (1996
data). This year alone, nearly 50,000 young people will take advantage of the opportunity to serve and
earn an award of up to $4,725 to pay for college or repay student loans.

Expanding Investments In Youth Education And Training. One of the President's top priorities is
fighting efforts by Congress to eliminate both the Summer Jobs Program, which provides jobs to
roughly 530,000 disadvantaged young people, and the new Youth Opportunity Area Initiative, which
would help provide job training and help finding jobs for up to 50,000 youth in the poorest
communities nationwide. The Summer Jobs programs provides an estimated 25 percent of the
summer jobs held by African American 14-15 years olds and at least 16 percent held by Hispanic
14-15 year olds. The Youth Opportunity Area Initiative program provides high school dropouts
between the ages of 16 and 24 with academic and job-skills training, as well as apprenticeships
building and rehabilitating affordable housing.

Record Enrollment. A record percentage of African Americans were enrolled in post-secondary
education in 1996 -- 35.7 percent of African American high school graduates.

Expanding College Opportunity with Tuition Tax Credits, Education IRAs, and Largest
Increase in Pell Grants in 20 Years. The President is making the first two years of college
universally available with $1500 HOPE Scholarship credits and a 20 percent tax credit helps offset
tuition costs for college or lifetime learning. The expanded IRA allows penaIty- and tax-free
withdrawals for education. And, in the coming school year, nearly 4 million students will receive a
Pell Grant of up to $3,000, 30 percent larger than when the President took office. In the 1995-96
school year, 57 percent of all African American students enrolled full-time in college received a Pell
Grant. In addition, the FY99 budget proposes $249 million more for Pell Grants, which would help
increase the maximum by another $100 to $3,100 -- the highest ever. This would reach 3.9 million
low- and middle-income undergraduates. If the President's budget were enacted, the maximum grant
would be 25-percent higher than in 1996.

Fostering Diversity. The White House recently awarded Presidential Awards for Excellence in
Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring Grants to both individual mentors and
institutions that foster mentoring, helping to ensure that America's future scientists and
engineers come from all of the nation's racial and cultural segments of the population.

Modernizing Our Schools. The President, with the help of Senator Carol Moseley-Braun CD IL), is
working to pass federal tax credits to help rebuild, modernize, and build over 5,000 public schools
nationwide.

                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                   8
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
national average of 18 students in grades 1-3, by helping local schools hire an additional 100,000
well-prepared teachers. Research shows that minorities, and low-income students in particular,
benefit academically from smaller classes.
Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade. More than 1000 colleges have committed
work-study students to tutor children in reading, and thousands of AmeriCorps members and senior
volunteers are organizing volunteer reading campaigns. In addition, the President is working to enact
an early literacy bill such as the America Reads Initiative that will provide more tutors after school,
improve the teaching of reading in our schools, and help parents help their children learn to read.

Greater Access to Education Technology. The President has made an unprecedented
commitment to bringing technology into the classroom and has called for technology training for
teachers and expanded access for teachers and students to computers in the classroom. As a part
of this effort, the Clinton Administration has secured the E-Rate, provided for in the
Telecommunications Act, a discounted education rate for telecommunications services so schools
and libraries will be able to bring technology into the classroom, set up phone lines and access
the Internet at a fraction of the cost. Schools and libraries are eligible for up to 90 percent
(depending on poverty level) of discounts on telecommunications and information services.

Striving for Excellence. Thanks to President Clinton's leadership, the Title I program is helping
more than 10 million disadvantaged students reach high academic standards by giving them extra help
with basic and advanced skills. In the 1994-95 school year, 26 percent of the children benefiting from
the Title I program were African American.

Working to Pass the High Hopes for College Initiative. The High Hopes for College Initiative will
inspire more young people to have high expectations, to stay in school and study hard, and to go to
college. The Clinton Administration is working with Congressman Chaka Fattah (D PA) and other
Members to pass this initiative which makes a long-term investment -- starting with $140 million in
FY99 -- to promote partnerships between colleges and middle or junior high schools in low-income
communities. The President's High Hopes program will provide one million at-risk middle school
students (over five years) the mentoring and tutoring needed to raise education expectations and
eliminate barriers to college.

Proposing Education Opportunity Zones. The President proposed $1.5 billion, over five years,
to bolster reform efforts by high-poverty urban and rural school districts that demonstrate both
a commitment to and a track record in improving educational achievement. Funds will be used
to improve accountability, turn around failing schools, recognize outstanding teachers, deal with
ineffective ones and expand public school choice. Added investments in these communities will
accelerate progress and provide successful models of system-wide, standards-based reform.

Getting Good Teachers to Underserved Areas. Responding to the need for a diverse and
excellent teaching force, President Clinton proposed a $350 million program to attract talented
people of all backgrounds to teach at low-income schools across the nation. The funding also
will be used to dramatically improve the quality of training given to future teachers. This new
program will help bring nearly 35,000 new teachers into high-poverty schools in urban and rural
areas over the next five years.


                                                  9             -\utomated R"'_'illi .·'la......gement SysteIJ.
                                                                Jiex-Dump Conversion


Enhanced Penalties for Hate Crimes. As part of the historic 1994 Crime Act, the President signed
the Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act which provides for longer sentences where the offense
is determined to be a hate crime.

White House Conference on Hate Crimes. President Clinton hosted the first White House
Conference on Hate Crimes, which examined laws and remedies that can make a difference in
preventing hate crimes, highlighted solutions that are working in communities across the country, and
continued the frank and open dialogue needed to build One America. The President announced
significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get tough on hate crimes, including:
support for legislation to expand the federal hate crimes law to cover crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender, or disability; the creation of a network of local hate crime working groups;
the addition of approximately 50 FBI agents and federal prosecutors to enforce hate crimes laws;
improved collection of data on hate crimes; and the production of materials to educate the public
-- especially youth -- about hate crimes.

Took Action Against Church Burnings. Focused the nation's attention and resources to help stop
the rash of church burnings across the country, prosecuted those responsible, and sped the rebuilding
process.

Falling Crime Rates. Violent crime is down six years in a row, the longest period of decline since
1960. Juvenile crime, which had been exploding, has declined 2 years in a row. Property and violent
crime victimization rates are at their lowest levels in nearly 25 years.

Putting 100,000 New Police on the Streets and Providing COPS Grants to Underserved Areas.
The President's Crime Bill, through the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program, has
already funded nearly 80,000 new officers. As a part of the COPS Program, the President announced
new grants to increase police presence and community policing in underserved neighborhoods. Under
this initiative, 18 cities will share $106 million to hire 620 new community policing officers. The
pilot cities were selected following an analysis of crime, demographic and economic data.

Promoting Community Prosecutions. The President's FY99 budget includes $50 million for grants
to promote community prosecution, which builds on effective community policing strategies. The
funds will enable local prosecutors across the country to playa more active role in crime fighting by
spending more time in their neighborhoods, both helping to solve crimes and preventing them before
they happen.


                                  SAFE AND CLEAN ENVIRONMENT


Environmental Justice and Redevelopment. The Clinton Administration issued an Executive Order
on Environmental Justice to ensure that low-income citizens and minorities do not suffer a
disproportionate burden of industrial pollution. The Administration identified pilot projects to be
undertaken across the country to redevelop contaminated sites in low-income communities, tum them


                                                  10                  'JtorrlR(,'J t·,., ,", .da.nagementSysl~.
                                                                       x-Dump Conversion

Issued Toughest New Air Quality Standards in a Generation. The Clinton Administration issued
new air quality standards for smog and soot that will prevent 15,000 premature deaths a year and
improve the lives of millions of Americans who suffer from respiratory illnesses.
               ~



Cleaning Up Toxic Waste Sites and Redeveloping Brownfields. This Administration has cleaned
up twice as many Superfund sites in less than six years as previous administrations did in twelve. To
date, the Administration has awarded 228 Brownfields grants, for over $42 million, to states, cities,
towns, counties and tribes. These grants have leveraged nearly $1 billion for redevelopment of
industrial sites and created over 2,000 jobs.

Providing Safe Drinking Water. The President proposed and signed legislation to strengthen the
Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that our families have healthy, clean tap water. The Administration
required America's 55,000 water utilities companies to provide regular reports to their customers on
the quality of their drinking water.

Reducing the Threat of Global Warming. The Administration negotiated an international treaty to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in an environmentally strong and economically sound way. The
President's has proposed a five-year $6.3 billion package of tax incentives and research investment to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.

Protecting Our Natural Treasures. The Clinton Administration has protected or enhanced
nearly 150 million acres of public and private lands, from the red rock canyons of Utah to the
Florida Everglades. And the Administration has recently reached agreements to protect
Yellowstone from mining and save the ancient redwoods of California's Headwaters Forest.


                                       AMERICAN LEADERSHIP


Made an Historic Presidential Trip to Africa. In 1998, President Clinton made the first trip by a
sitting U.S. President to Ghana, Uganda, Botswana and Senegal. While in Africa, President Clinton
focused on key issues of development, trade, investment, empowerment of women and the
environment. The trip increased and enhanced ties with Africa and built upon the work and
achievements of late Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, Transportation Secretary Slater and Presidential
Special Envoy Jesse Jackson.

Assisted South Africa's Transition to Democracy. Provided over $600 million in the first three
years to the newly-elected democratic government of South Africa to support democracy and
development. Established the Gore-Mbeki Bi-National Commission to promote cooperation in trade,
development, the environment and security.

Hosted the First-Ever White House Conference on Africa in July 1994. This Conference brought
together key American policy-makers and leaders to discuss the future of US-Africa relations.

Restored Democracy for Haiti. Restored democracy to Haiti and ended the military dictatorship.


                                                                Automated Records Management Systen.
                                                  11
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
deepens trade and investment between Africa and the United States and is the cornerstone of the
Administration's Africa policy. The President supports passage of the bipartisan African Growth and
Opportunity Act which complements his "Partnership Initiative" by further strengthening U.S.-Africa
trade relations.
                                                                                                     9/98




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 12
                          Working on Behalf of Asian Pacific Americans


                                                ECONOMY

Balanced the Federal Budget. In 1992, the budget deficit was $290 billion, a record dollar high.
 This year, the budget will be in surplus for the first time in 30 years.

Saving Social Security First.       President Clinton is committed to saving Social Security for the 21 st
Century. The President will fight any attempt to break the budget rules and drain the surplus. His
commitment is unwavering: every penny of any future surplus must be reserved until a bipartisan plan
to save Social Security is enacted.

Nearly 17 Million New Jobs. Under President Clinton, more new jobs have been created in 5 Y2
years than were created during the entire 8 years of the Reagan Administration (16.7 million under
Pres. Clinton vs. 16.0 million under Pres. Reagan).

Declining Unemployment: 28-Year Low. In 1992, the unemployment rate averaged 7.5
percent, today (August 1998) the unemployment rate is 4.5 percent -- the lowest level since 1970.
The unemployment rate has been below 5 percent for 14 consecutive months.

The Lowest Inflation in More than 30 Years. Since 1993, the inflation rate has averaged just
2.5 percent -- the lowest average inflation rate since the Kennedy Administration. Over the past
year, the Consumer Price Index has increased only 1.6 percent.

Strong Private Sector Growth. The private sector of the economy has grown 3.9 percent
annually -- the fastest rate of private-sector growth since the Johnson Administration.

The Median Household Income for Asian Pacific Americans Increased 2.2 Percent in 1997. Income for the
median, or typical, Asian Pacific American household rose $980 in 1997, from $44,269 in 1996 to
$45,249 (adjusted for inflation). This is an increase of 2.2 percent over 1996.

Tax Cuts For Low-Income Working Families. President Clinton's 1993 Economic Plan
provided tax cuts to 15 million hard-pressed working families by expanding the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC). The average family with two kids who received the EITC received a tax cut
of$I,026.                                                        -

Minimum Wage Increased. Increased the Minimum Wage from $4.25 to $5.15 per hour--
increasing wages for 10 million.

Asian Pacific American Poverty Down More than 8 Percent since 1993. The poverty rate of Asian
Pacific Americans has declined from 15.3 percent in 1993 to 14.0 percent in 1997. Whi Ie this marks
significant progress, President Clinton will continue to fight for policies that help to raise incomes
and reduce poverty.
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
years, (FY93-97) the Small Business Administration (SBA) has backed more than 16,760 loans worth
$5.2 billion in loans to Asian Pacific American businesses. From FY98 through FY 2000, the
Administration expects to deliver another $4.7 billion in loans to Asian Pacific American-owned
businesses. That means that during the eight years of the Clinton Administration, the SBA will have
delivered almost $10 billion in loan capital to Asian Pacific American entrepreneurs. In FY 2000,
SBA expects to back more that $1.6 billion in loans to Asian Pacific American businesses, almost
triple the amount loaned in FY92. In the SBA's 8(a) Minority Enterprise Development Program,
Asian Pacific Americans own 1,341 of the 6,1 00 participating businesses. Those firms received about
$1.7 billion in federal contracts in FY97. Almost 19,000 Asian Pacific Americans received business
counseling and training under SBA's Small Business Development Center program, and SBA's
SCORE program counseled more than 9,000 Asian Pacific Americans last year.

Ensuring Minority Business Owners Have a Fair Opportunity to Compete. The President signed
the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century into law on June 9, 1998. The Act protects the
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Program, a program that ensures that minority and
women-owned businesses have an opportunity to compete for transportation projects. The
Administration helped defeat an amendment to the House version of this bill that would have
eliminated the DBE Program. In a different measure, the President also approved the creation of
a new program to target assistance to minority-owned businesses in industries that continue to
reflect the effects of discrimination. As a result, thousands of minority-owned businesses will be
able to compete more effectively for government contracts.

Expanding Investment in Urban and Rural Areas. Thanks to President Clinton and the 1993
Economic Plan, 125 Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities have been created, programs
that are spurring economic development in distressed communities. And the President's FY99
budget provides $150 million a year for 10 years to fund 15 new urban Empowerment Zones
(EZs) and $20 million a year for 10 years to fund five new rural EZs. Additionally, the President's
FY99 budget includes $400 million -- nearly triple the FY98 appropriation -- for a new
Community Empowerment Fund (CEF) that is expected to leverage an estimated $2 billion in
private-sector loans to help communities invest in businesses and create jobs.

Expanding Access to Capital with Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI).
The President has expanded access to capital through the creation of the Community Development
Financial Institutions Fund, which supports banks and other entities that specialize in lending and
investing in underserved communities. The President's FY99 Budget includes a $45 million
increase in CDFI funding (from $80 million to $125 million) to allow the Fund to provide
additional support for these institutions, including through an expanded training and technical
assistance initiative.

Highest Homeownership Rate in History.   There are more than 6.5 million new homeowners since the
President took office.

Expanding Low-Income Housing Tax Credit by 40 Percent. In 1993, President Clinton

                                                 2
                                                               Automated Records Management Syster,
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
private development of low-income housing and helping to build 75,000-90,000 housing units
each year. President Clinton now proposes to expand the credit by 40 percent. Over the next
five years, this expansion will mean an additional 150,000 to 180,000 quality affordable rental
units.

Put Forth a "Play-by-the-Rules" Homeownership Initiative and a Homeownership Zones
Initiative. The FY99 budget proposal for the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation includes
$25 million for a new initiative that would make homeownership more accessible to families who
have a good rental history but have difficulty purchasing a home, 10,000 lower-income and
minority families who are currently renting would benefit from this initiative. In addition, the
President's FY99 budget includes $25 million for Homeownership Zones, abandoned housing
and distressed neighborhoods that communities could reclaim with this funding. Funds could
be used for property acquisition, demolition, site preparation, housing construction or
rehabilitation,
homeownership counseling, relocation, and activities to further fair housing and
homeownership.

Working on Behalf of Minority Farmers. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is
working to strengthen programs and increase outreach targeted to underserved communities,
including increasing its lending to minority and women producers. In the past five years there
has been a 74 percent increase in direct lending to these groups -- from $46.5 million in FY93
to $81 million in FY97. Additionally, the Administration is committed to righting any past wrongs
by federal employees and has worked with the Congress in crafting language contained in the
Agriculture Appropriations bill that would waive the two-year statute of limitations on
discrimination complaints against USDA's farm and housing loan programs. This waiver
would allow compensation to be provided to many minority farmers who were victims of
discrimination by USDA from the early 1980's through the 1990's.


                                 INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS AFFAIRS

Facing the Challenges of the Global Economy. The President's strategy of fiscal discipline,
investment in our people, and open trade is working for America. For the U.S. economy to continue
to prosper, the economies of the world need to rebound from their recent difficulties. The United
States, along with other leading nations, are working together to intensify efforts to speed economic
recovery in Asia.

Opening Marker Abroad: Over 240 Trade Agreements Have Helped Expand American
Exports and Create American Jobs. Since President Clinton took office, the Administration
has concluded over 240 new trade agreements. This has helped expand exports so that over the last
five years, new exports have accounted for more than one-third of our economic growth and have
helped created jobs that, on average, pay 15 percent more than non-export related jobs. Notably,
thirty percent of U.S. exports go to Asia and this country exports more goods to Asia than Europe.

                                                  3            Automated Records Management ~~!it@m
                                                               Hex·Dump Conversion
Administration completed a "trifecta" of three major global trade agreements in the World Trade
Organization: the Information Technology Agreement covering $500 billion in global trade and more
than $100 billion in U.S. exports, the global telecommunications services agreement (which will create
more than a million jobs in the next ten years) and the financial services accord (which covers 95
percent of the global financial services market). Together, these initiatives cover trade totaling more
than $1 trillion annually.

Eliminated Barriers To Open Trade In Asia Pacific Nations From Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) Summit. Secured commitments from Asia Pacific nations to eliminate barriers to open trade
in the region by 2020 for developing countries and 2010 for industrialized countries. Over the next
two years, 15 sectors will be identified for tariff reductions, including energy products and services,
environmental technologies and services, natural resources, medical equipment, telecommunications,
gems and jewelry.


                                  FIGHTING FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

Building One America. The President has led the nation in an effort to become One America in the
21st Century: a place where we respect others' differences and, at the same time, embrace the common
values that unite us. Angela Oh served on the Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race,
which the President charged with overseeing this effort. The President, the Administration and the
Advisory Board were actively involved in public outreach efforts -- including holding numerous
public meetings and town halls -- to engage Americans across the nation in this historic effort.
One of the critical elements of the President's Initiative on Race was identifying, highlighting
and sharing with the nation promising practices -- local and national efforts to promote racial
reconciliation. The Advisory Board presented their final report to the President on September
18,1998, and recommended that conversations on race continue.

Creating an Administration That Looks like One America.    Appointed the most diverse Administration
in history. The Clinton Administration has more than triple the number of Asian Pacific American
appointees as the previous Administration including Bill Lann Lee, Acting Assistant .Attorney General
for Civil Rights, Department of Justice; Nancy Ann-Min Deparle, Administrator of the Health Care
Finance Administration, Department of Health and Human Services; Robert Gee, Assistant Secretary
for Policy, Planning and Program Evaluation, Department of Energy; Paul Igasaki, Vice Chair, U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; Rose Ochi, Director, Office of Community Relations,
Department of Justice; Donna Tanoue, Chair, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; Jeanette
Takamura, Assistant Secretary for Aging, Department of Health & Human Services; T.S. Chung,
Director Advocacy Center, International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce; Barbara
Chow, Associate Director for Human Resources, Office of Management and Budget; Dr. lsi Siddiqui,
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Regulatory Programs, Department of Agriculture; Maria


                                                    4
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
the President and Deputy Director of Public Liaison, The White House.


Increasing the Number ofJudicial Appointments. Nominated more Asian Pacific Americans to the
federal bench than any other Administration. Appointments include the Honorable A. Wallace
Tashima, Judge, U.S. Ninth Circuit Court and District Court judges Denny Chin, Anthony Ishii,
George King, and Susan Oki Mollway.

Ordered an Assessment of Affirmative Action Programs. The President ordered a comprehensive
review of the government's affirmative action programs which concluded that affirmative action is still
an effective and important tool to expand educational and economic opportunity to all Americans.
This review of federal affirmative action programs has helped to ensure that these programs are
fair and effective and that they can survive legal challenges. As a result, programs that benefit
women and minorities, including students, working men and women, and business owners,
remain in effect and are more likely to be upheld by the courts.

Increasing Civil Rights Enforcement. Vice President Gore announced the Administration's
proposal for the largest single increase in funding to enforce existing civil rights laws in nearly two
decades. Through new reforms and heightened commitment to enforcement, the Administration will
seek to prevent discrimination before it occurs and to punish those who do discriminate in
employment, education, housing and health care, and against those with disabilities. The Clinton
Administration's FY99 budget contains $602 million for civil rights enforcement agencies and
offices -- an increase of $86 million over last year's funding.

Increasing Funding for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The
cornerstone of the improved civil rights enforcement effort is a $37 million increase (15 percent)
for the EEOC. Through increased use of mediation, improved information technology and an
expanded investigative staff, the EEOC will reduce the average time for resolving private-sector
complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months and cut the backlog of cases from 64,000 to 28,000,
by the year 2000.

Opposed California Prop. 209 and Similar Measures.   The Clinton Administration strongly opposes
state and local initiatives to eliminate affirmative action programs that expand opportunities for
Asian Pacific Americans and others. The Administration opposed Proposition 209 in California
and filed amicus briefs opposing Prop. 209, which currently prohibits state affirmative action programs.
 The Clinton Administration opposed a similar initiative in Houston, which was defeated and is
currently opposing an initiative in Washington that is similar to Prop. 209. In all these cases,
representatives of the administration have spoken out strongly against these initiatives as unfair
and a barrier to equality.

Ensuring Election Fairness. The Clinton Administration defended racially fair redistricting plans
against claims that they were unconstitutional and prevented election day discrimination against


                                                     5
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
number of states and counties. Continued enforcement efforts to ensure that citizens who rely on
languages other than English have the same opportunities to participate in voting-related activities as
English-speaking voters.


Increasing Voter Registration. During 1995 and 1996, the National Voter Registration Act or
"Motor Voter" law registered nearly 14 million new voters and made voting easier for millions more.
Notably, 1996 saw the highest percentage of voter registration since 1960. [FEC, 6/97]

Working for Fair Housing. To respond to the increase in reported cases of serious fair housing
violations, HUD will double the number of its civil rights enforcement actions by the year 2000.
HUD has also committed $15 million to 67 fair housing centers around the country to assist in
fighting housing discrimination this year. In addition, the President's budget proposes $10
million for a targeted enforcement initiative that will use paired testing -- identical applicants of
different races or genders approaching Realtors or landlords -- to detect and eliminate housing
discrimination. Also, Secretary Cuomo now focuses on one race-based housing discrimination
case each week and conducts
a community forum around each case to turn the negative experience into a positive one that
helps bring the community together.

Defended Fairness. The Clinton Administration has filed more cases between 1993 and 1997 to
enforce fair housing laws than any other Administration (more than 500 cases). For instance, this
Administration desegregated a Vidor, Texas, public housing complex and ordered a Mississippi bank
to implement remedial lending plans for minority customers who were unfairly denied loans by the
bank.

Eliminated Discriminatory "Redlining" Practices. The Clinton Administration negotiated
agreements with health care agencies to eliminate discriminatory "redlining" practices denying home
health care services based on residential location.

Working to Ensure a Fair and Accurate Census. The Clinton Administration is working to
ensure that Census 2000 is the most accurate census possible using the best, most up-to-date scientific
inethods as recommended by the National Academy of Sciences. According to the Census Bureau, the
1990 Census missed 8.4 million people and double-counted 4.4 million others. Nationally, 2.3 percent
of Asians Pacific Americans were not counted in the 1990 census. While missing or miscounting so
many people is a problem, the fact that certain groups -- such as children, the poor, people of color, city
dwellers and people who live in rural rental homes -- were missed more often than others made the
undercount even more inaccurate. A fair and accurate Census is a fundamental part of a
representative democracy and is the basis for providing equality under the law. The President is
determined to have a fair and full count in 2000.


                                       CHILDREN AND FAMILIES


                                                    6
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex.Dump Conversion
weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing family member without jeopardizing their job.
Millions of workers have already benefited from FMLA since its enactment. The President also
proposed expanding the Family & Medical Leave Act to allow workers up to 24 hours per year of
unpaid leave for parent-teacher conferences or routine medical care for a child.

Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities. President Clinton has announced a $400
million initiative to end racial and ethnic health disparities. Th effort sets a national goal of
eliminating the longstanding disparities by the year 2010 in six key health areas: infant
mortality, diabetes, cancer screening and management, heart disease, AIDS and immunizations.
 Currently, for example, Vietnamese women suffer from cervical cancer at nearly five times the rate of
white women. The President announced a five-step plan -- led by Surgeon General and
Assistant Secretary for Health Dr. David Satcher -- to mobilize the resources and expertise of the
Federal government, the private sector, and local communities.

Focused Health Efforts. Established the Office of the Minority Health Research and Alternative Medicine
at the National Institutes of Health. Helped communities develop culturally-competent systems of care
for children with serious emotional disturbances through the Comprehensive Mental Health Services
for Children and Families program. Negotiated agreements with hospitals and nursing homes to
eliminate barriers to equal access for minorities based on language.

Fighting to Pass a Strong, Enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights. President Clinton has called on
the Congress to pass a strong, enforceable patients' bill of rights that assures Americans the quality
health care they need. The bill should include important patient protections such as: assuring direct
access to specialists; real emergency room protections; continuity of care provisions that protect
patients from abrupt changes in treatment; a fair, timely, and independent appeals process for patient
grievances; and enforcement provisions to make these rights real.

Protected and Strengthened Medicare. The Balanced Budget Act extended the life of the Medicare
Trust Fund for at least a decade; expanded choices in health plans; and provided beneficiaries new
preventive benefits. The President has also put forth a new proposal that will provide greater access to
health insurance for Americans ages 55 to 65, including an option to buy into Medicare.

Extended Health Care to Millions of Children with the Children's Health Insurance Plan
(CHIP). Because of the President's leadership, the Balanced Budget included $24 billion to provide
real health care coverage to up to five million more children, the largest children's health care budget
increase since Medicaid was created in 1965. Minority children make up a disproportionate number
ofthe over 10 million uninsured children, with Asian Pacific American children making up 15.8
percent of all uninsured children. The Administration is actively reaching out to communities to target
and enroll eligible, uninsured children in CHIP.

Increased WIC -- $1 Billion Higher. Under President Clinton, participation in the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) has expanded by 1.7 million

                                                   7                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
from $2.9 billion to $3.9 billion. The President's budget proposes $4.1 billion in WIC funding to
serve 7.5 million women, infants, and children in 1999, fulfilling his goal of full participation in WIC.
 Research shows that every $1 increase in the prenatal care portion of the WIC program cuts between
$1. 77 and $3.90 in medical expenses in the first 60 days following childbirth. In 1996, 3 percent of
the infants who benefited from WIC were Asian Pacific American children.

Expanded Head Start By Nearly 60 Percent -- Over $1.5 Billion Higher Per Year. Since 1993,
President Clinton has expanded Head Start by 57 percent, from $2.8 billion in FY93 to $4.4 billion in
FY98. Of the estimated 830,000 children now enrolled in Head Start, 3 percent are Asian Pacific
American children. The President's FY99 Budget increases Head Start funding by $313 million,
which would mean Head Start funding would be 68-percent higher in 1999 than in 1993. The
President is on track to meet his goal of enrolling one million children in Head Start.

Proposed the Largest Single Investment in Child Care in the Nation's History. The President's
$21 billion child care proposal will give child care subsidies to millions of children and increase
tax credits for three million working families to help them pay for child care.

Providing After-School Opportunities for Up to Half a Million Children a Year. Last year, the
President fought for, and won, a $40 million expansion of the 21 st Century Community Learning
Centers program. Building on the success of this program, the President's FY99 budget includes a $200
million major expansion, which will provide safe and educational after-school opportunities for up to
500,000 school-age children in rural and urban communities across the country.


                                               EDUCATION

Made the Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years. Maintaining his longtime commitment to
education, the President enacted the largest investment in education in 30 years -- and the largest
investment in higher education since the G.!. Bill -- by signing the 1997 Balanced Budget Act.

Expanding Investments In Youth Education And Training. One of the President's top priorities is
fighting efforts by Congress to eliminate both the Summer Jobs Program, which provides jobs to
roughly 530,000 disadvantaged young people, and the new Youth Opportunity Area Initiative, which
would help provide job training and help finding jobs for up to 50,000 youth in the poorest
communities nationwide. The Youth Opportunity Area Initiative program provides high school
dropouts between the ages of 16 and 24 with academic and job-skills training, as well as
apprenticeships building and rehabilitating affordable housing.

Expanding College Opportunity with Tuition Tax Credits, Education IRAs, and Largest Increase in PeJJ
Grants in 20 Years. The President is making the first two years of college universally available with
$1500 HOPE Scholarship credits and a 20 percent tax credit helps offset tuition costs for college or
lifetime learning. The expanded IRA allows penalty- and tax-free withdrawals for education. And, in


                                                    8               Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
larger than when the President took office. In the 1995-96 school year, 33 percent of all Asian Pacific
American students enrolled full-time in college received a Pell Grant. In addition, the FY99 budget
proposes $249 million more for Pell Grants, which would help increase the maximum by another $100
to $3,100 -- the highest ever. This would reach 3.9 million low- and middle-income undergraduates.
If the President's budget were enacted, the maximum grant would be 25-percent higher than in 1996.
Fostering Diversity. The White House recently awarded Presidential Awards for Excellence in
Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring Grants to both individual mentors and
institutions that foster mentoring, helping to ensure that America's future scientists and
engineers come from all of the nation's racial and cultural segments of the population.

Modernizing Our Schools.  The President is working to pass federal tax credits to help rebuild,
modernize, and build over 5,000 public schools nationwide.

Reducing Class Size. The President is pressing Congress to enact his proposal to reduce class size to a
national average ofl8 students in grades 1-3, by helping local schools hire an additional 100,000
well-prepared teachers. Research shows that minorities, and low-income students in particular, benefit
academically from smaller classes.

Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade. More than 1000 colleges have committed
work-study students to tutor children in reading, and thousands of AmeriCorps members and senior
volunteers are organizing volunteer reading campaigns. In addition, the President is working to enact
an early literacy bill such as the America Reads Initiative that will provide more tutors after school,
improve the teaching of reading in our schools, and help parents help their children learn to read.

Striving for Excellence with National Education Standards. Thanks to President Clinton's
leadership, the Title I program is helping more than 10 million disadvantaged students reach high
academic standards by giving them extra help with basic and advanced skills. In the 1994-95 school
year, 3 percent of the children benefiting from the Title I program were Asian Pacific American
students.

Working to Pass the High Hopes for College Initiative. The High Hopes for College Initiative will
inspire more young people to have high expectations, to stay in school and study hard, and to go to
college. The Clinton Administration is working with Congress to pass this initiative which makes a
long-term investment -- starting with $140 million in FY99 -- to promote partnerships between colleges
and middle or junior high schools in low-income communities. The President's High Hopes program
will provide one million at-risk middle school students (over five years) the mentoring and tutoring
needed to raise education expectations and eliminate barriers to college.

Helping to Assist Schools with More Foreign Language Programs; Opposing English Only. The
Administration has restructured Foreign Language Assistance Programs to assist local schools in
establishing programs in Chinese, Japanese and Korean. The Clinton Administration strongly


                                                   9
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
jeopardized services and programs for non-English speakers and jeopardized assistance to the tens of
thousands of new immigrants and others seeking to learn English as adults.

Addressing Minority Needs. Hosted Asian Pacific American Education Forums to address the needs of
Asian Pacific American students and their teachers.


AmeriCorps College Support. Since 1993, more than 100,000 people have had the opportunity to
serve through AmeriCorps, with Asian Pacific Americans comprising 3 percent of all participants (1996
data). This year alone, nearly 50,000 young people will take advantage of the opportunity to serve
and earn an award of up to $4,725 to pay for college or repay student loans.

Increased Bilingual Education by 35 Percent. Last year (FY97) in the Balanced Budget Agreement, the
President secured a 35 percent increase in bilingual and immigrant education. The bilingual education
funding will help school districts teach English to more than a million limited-English proficient
children, as well as provide some 4,000 teachers with the training they need to do their jobs better.
The Immigrant Education program will help more than a thousand school districts provide
supplemental instructional services to 875,000 recent immigrant students. And the President's FY99
budget proposal includes an increase of $33 million for Bilingual and Immigrant Education.

Proposing Education Opportunity Zones. The President proposed $1.5 billion, over five years,
to bolster reform efforts by high-poverty urban and rural school districts that demonstrate both
a commitment to, and a track record in, improving educational achievement. Funds will be
used to improve accountability, turn around failing schools, recognize outstanding teachers, deal
with ineffective ones and expand public school choice. Added investments in these communities
will accelerate progress and provide successful models of system-wide, standards-based reform.

Expanding Access to Educational Technology. The Clinton Administration created the
Technology Literacy Challenge Fund to help connect every classroom to the Internet by 2000, increase
the number of multimedia computers in the classroom, provide teachers with technology training, and
promote the development of high-quality educational software.

Linking Schools and Libraries to the Internet. The Clinton Administration has secured the
E-Rate, provided for in the Telecommunications Act, a discounted education rate for
telecommunications services so schools and libraries will be able to bring technology into the
classroom, set up phone lines and access the Internet at a fraction of the cost. Schools and
libraries are eligible for up to 90 percent (depending on poverty level) of discounts on
telecommunications and information services.

Opposed GaUegly Amendment. The Administration opposed the Gallegly Amendment which would
have ended the guarantee of public education for all children. It would have shifted immigration
enforcement from the borders and work sites to classrooms and made children susceptible to gangs and

                                                      10

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


                                           FIGHTING CRIME

White House Conference on Hate Crimes. President Clinton hosted the first White House
Conference on Hate Crimes, which examined laws and remedies that can make a difference in
preventing hate crimes, highlighted solutions that are working in communities across the country, and
continued the frank and open dialogue needed to build One America. The President announced
significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get tough on hate crimes, including:
support for legislation to expand the federal hate crimes law to cover crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender, or disability; the creation of a network of local hate crime working groups;
the addition of approximately 50 FBI agents and federal prosecutors to enforce hate crimes laws;
improved collection of data on hate crimes; and the production of materials to educate the public
-- especially youth -- about hate crimes.

Enhanced Penalties for Hate Crimes. As part of the historic 1994 Crime Act, the President signed
the Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act which provides for longer sentences where the offense
is determined to be a hate crime.

Falling Crime Rates. Violent crime is down six years in a row, the longest period of decline since
1960. Juvenile crime, which had been exploding, has declined 2 years in a row. Property and violent
crime victimization rates are at their lowest levels in nearly 25 years.

Won Passage of the Most Comprehensive Crime Bill Ever. In 1994, after more than six years of
gridlock, a bipartisan majority in Congress passed the toughest, smartest Crime, Bill in the
nation's history. Among other provisions, the new law now provides: a targeted
"Three-Strikes-and-You're-Out" provision to put career violent offenders behind bars for life;
an expanded death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers and
nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons; and funding for 100,000 more prison cells to
help states ensure that violent offenders serve their full sentences.

Putting 100,000 New Police on the Streets and Providing COPS Grants to Underserved Areas.
The President's Crime Bill, through the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program, has
already funded nearly 80,000 new officers. As a part of the COPS Program, the President announced
new grants to increase police presence and community policing in underserved neighborhoods. Under
this initiative, 18 cities will share $106 million to hire 620 new community policing officers. The
pilot cities were selected following an analysis of crime, demographic and economic data.

Promoting Community Prosecutions. The President's FY99 budget includes $50 million for grants
to promote community prosecution, which builds on effective community policing strategies. The
funds will enable local prosecutors across the country to playa more active role in crime fighting by
spending more time in their neighborhoods, both helping to solve crimes and preventing them before
they happen.

                                                 11                Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


Environmental Justice and Redevelopment. The Clinton Administration issued an Executive Order
on Environmental Justice to ensure that low-income citizens and minorities do not suffer a
disproportionate burden of industrial pollution. The Administration identified pilot projects to be
undertaken across the country to redevelop contaminated sites in low-income communities, tum them
into useable space, create jobs and enhance community development.

Issued Toughest New Air Quality Standards in a Generation. The Clinton Administration issued
new air quality standards for smog and soot that will prevent 15,000 premature deaths a year and
improve the lives of millions of Americans who suffer from respiratory illnesses.

Cleaning Up Toxic Waste Sites and Redeveloping Brownfields. This Administration has cleaned
up twice as many Superfund sites in less than six years as previous administrations did in twelve. To
date, the Administration has awarded 228 Brownfields grants, for over $42 million, to states, cities,
towns, counties, and tribes. These grants have leveraged nearly $1 billion for redevelopment of
industrial sites and created over 2,000 jobs.

Providing Safe Drinking Water. The President proposed and signed legislation to strengthen the
Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that our families have healthy, clean tap water. The Administration
required America's 55,000 water utilities companies to provide regular reports to their customers on
the quality of their drinking water.

Reducing the Threat of Global Warming. The Administration negotiated an international treaty to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in an environmentally strong and economically sound way. The
President's has proposed a five-year $6.3 billion package of tax incentives and research investment to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.

Protecting Our Natural Treasures. The Clinton Administration has protected or enhanced
nearly 150 million acres of public and private lands, from the red rock canyons of Utah to the
Florida Everglades. And the Administration has recently reached agreements to protect
Yellowstone from mining and save the ancient redwoods of California's Headwaters Forest.


                                             IMMIGRATION

Fairness for Immigrants. The President worked with Congress to correct the most egregious impacts
of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996. As a result, almost a
million people will be able to proceed with legalizing their immigration status under the former
standards of immigration law and not the new, stricter and more burdensome standards enacted in
1996.


                                                  12                                   ement System
                                                                Automated Records Manag
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Agricultural Research Act into law, which restores food stamp benefits to 250,000 elderly, disabled,
and other needy legal immigrants, including 75,000 children, who lawfully resided in the U.S. as of
August 22, 1996, and lost assistance as a result of cuts in the 1996 welfare law that had nothing to do
with welfare reform. It restores benefits to Hmong immigrants from Laos who aided our country
during the Vietnam War and extends the period during which refugees and asylees may qualify for
Food Stamps while they await citizenship. This law funds a significant part of the President's 1999
budget proposal to restore food stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants, but the President's budget
proposal would go further by covering families with children regardless of the date they entered the
U.S. This restoration builds on the President's success last year in restoring SSI and Medicaid to
420,000 legal immigrants whose benefits were also terminated in welfare reform (see below).

Reversing Unfair Cuts; Protects Legal Immigrants Who Become Disabled and Those Currently
Receiving Benefits. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored $11.5 billion in SSI and Medicaid
benefits for legal immigrants whose benefits were also terminated in welfare reform. This law
protects those immigrants now receiving assistance, ensuring that they will not be turned out of their
apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left destitute. And for immigrants already here but not
receiving benefits, the BBA does not change the rules retroactively. Immigrants in the country as of
August 22, 1996, but not receiving benefits at that time who subsequently become disabled will also be
fully eligible for SSI and Medicaid benefits. When the President signed the 1996 Welfare Reform Law,
he pledged to go back and change provisions that have nothing to do with welfare refoml, such as
cutting off benefits to legal immigrants. Critics said the changes would never be made. However, in
1997 and again in 1998, the President followed through on his pledge -- and won many of the changes
he sought in the 1996 law.

Strengthening the Naturalization Process. The Administration made naturalization a top priority of
the Immigration and Naturalization Service in order to continue fostering legal immigration while
combating illegal immigration. For instance, over one million individuals were naturalized in 1996.
The Administration continues to work to streamline and improve the naturalization process so that
eligible individuals who have played by the rules can become full partners in America. In FY99, the
Administration is seeking an infusion of new resources to reduce the backlog of naturalization
applications and improve customer service.

Defended Immigrant Rights. The Administration defeated legislative efforts which would have
significantly eroded health care for immigrants. The bipartisan agreement strengthened the
sponsorship requirement while preserving the basic ability of families to reunify.


                                       AMERICAN LEADERSHIP

Persuaded North Korea To Freeze its Dangerous Nuclear Program. The Administration
persuaded North Korea to freeze its dangerous nuclear program and is one of the leading forces for
peace on the Korean Peninsula.


                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  13
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
bipartisan consensus for engagement with China to advance U.S. interests and draw the world's most
populous nation more fully into the international community.

Supporting Human Rights In China. The Administration has engaged China's leaders in
ground-breaking human rights dialogue.


Led International Efforts Against Terrorism. The Administration has led international efforts
against terrorism, including signing anti-terrorism legislation that ensures strong penalties for convicted
terrorists.

Secured Bipartisan Senate Ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Start II
Treaty. The convention bans the production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons. Start II,
together with Start I, will reduce U.S. and Russian nuclear arsenals two-thirds from their Cold War
heights.

Meeting Emerging Threat of Biological Weapons. By strengthening our ability to respond to an
attack, vaccinating our troops and seeking tough inspection to enforce international treaty.

Led Efforts to Rid the World of Land Mines. The Administration has led efforts to rid the world of
land mines by eliminating non self-destructing mines from our arsenals, seeking alternatives to
self-destructing mines by 2006, and devoting more resources to removing existing mines than the rest
of the world combined.



                                                                                                 9/98




                                                   14
                                                                    Automated Records Management Systen.
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
                   Working on Behalf of the Hispanic Community


                                              ECONOMY

Balanced the Federal Budget. In 1992, the budget deficit was $290 billion, a record dollar high.
 This year, the budget will be in surplus for the first time in 30 years.

Saving Social Security First. President Clinton is committed to saving Social Security for the 21 st
Century. The President will fight any attempt to break the budget rules and drain the surplus. His
commitment is unwavering: every penny of any future surplus must be reserved until a bipartisan plan
to save Social Security is enacted.

Nearly 17 Million New Jobs. Under President Clinton, more new jobs have been created in 5 Y2 years
than were created during the entire 8 years of the Reagan Administration (16.7 million under Pres.
Clinton vs. 16.0 million under Pres. Reagan).

Declining Unemployment. The unemployment rate for Latinos has dropped from 11.3 percent in
January 1993 to 7.5 percent in August 1998.

Income ofMedian Hispanic Households Up $2,553 in Past Two Years. In 1997, the income of the
median Hispanic household, adjusted for inflation, increased from $25,477 in 1996 to $26,628 in 1997
-- an increase of $1,151 or 4.5 percent. Over the past two years, the income of the typical Hispanic
household has risen $2,553 -- or nearly 11 percent -- the largest two-year increase in Hispanic income
on record.

The Lowest Inflation in More than 30 Years. Since 1993, the inflation rate has averaged just 2.5
percent -- the lowest average inflation rate since the Kennedy Administration. Over the past year, the
Consumer Price Index has increased only 1.6 percent.

Strong Private Sector Growth. The private sector of the economy has grown 3.9 percent annually--
the fastest rate of private-sector growth since the Johnson Administration.

Tax Cuts For Low-Income Working Families. President Clinton's 1993 Economic Plan provided
tax cuts to 15 million hard-pressed working families by expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC). The average family with two kids who received the EITC received a tax cut of $1,026. In
1997, the EITC lifted more than 1.2 million Hispanics out of poverty.

Largest Hispanic Poverty Drop In Two Decades. Last year, the Hispanic poverty rate dropped from
29.4 percent to 27.1 percent -- the largest one-year drop in Hispanic poverty since 1978. Since
President Clinton took office, Hispanic poverty has dropped from 30.6 percent to 27.1 percent. While
this marks significant progress, President Clinton will continue to fight for policies that help to
raise incomes and reduce poverty.


                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
benefitting 1.6 million Hispanic workers.

Fighting for Paycheck Equity. The President has called on Congress to pass legislation to strengthen
laws prohibiting wage discrimination. In 1996, the median earnings of Hispanic women represented
57 percent of the median earnings for men.


Two and a Half Times More Small Business Loans to Hispanic Entrepreneurs. Between 1993
and 1997 the SBA approved nearly 15,000 loans to Hispanic entrepreneurs under the 7(a) and 504 loan
programs. Last year alone, the Small Business Administration granted more than 3,300 loans, worth
$615 million, to Hispanic small business owners, two and a half times the number of loans granted in
1992.

Supporting Minority Business Communities and Increasing Access to Capital. Building on the
efforts of the SBA, Vice President Gore unveiled aggressive plans to increase lending and business
services to the African American and Hispanic business communities nationwide. The SBA has set a
goal of providing an estimated total of $1.86 billion in loans to African American small businesses
over a three-year period and $2.5 billion worth of loans to Hispanic-owned businesses by the year
2000. In addition, the Vice President announced an unprecedented agreement between SBA and
the "Big Three" U.S. automakers to increase subcontracting awards to minority businesses by
nearly $3 billion over the next three years -- a 50 percent increase over current levels.

Ensuring Minority Business Owners Have a Fair Opportunity to Compete. The President signed
the Transportation Equity Act for the 21 st Century into law on June 9, 1998. The Act protects the
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Program, a program that ensures that minority and
women-owned businesses have an opportunity to compete for transportation projects. The
Administration helped defeat an amendment to the House version of this bill that would have
eliminated the DBE Program. In a different measure, the President also approved the creation of a
new program to target assistance to minority-owned businesses in industries that continue to
reflect the effects of discrimination. As a result, thousands of minority-owned businesses will be
able to compete more effectively for government contracts.

Expanding Investment in Urban and Rural Areas. Thanks to President Clinton and the 1993
Economic Plan, 125 Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities have been created, programs
that are spurring economic development in distressed communities. And the President's FY99
budget provides $150 million a year for 10 years to fund 15 new urban Empowerment Zones
(EZs) and $20 million a year for 10 years to fund five new rural EZs. Additionally, the
President's FY99 budget includes $400 million -- nearly triple the FY98 appropriation -- for a
new Community Empowerment Fund (CEF) that is expected to leverage an estimated $2 billion
in private-sector loans to help communities invest in businesses and create jobs.

Expanding Access to Capital with Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI). The
President has expanded access to capital through the creation of the Community Development
Financial Institutions Fund, which supports banks and other entities that specialize in lending and

                                                 2               Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
increase in CDFI funding (from $80 million to $125 million) to allow the Fund to provide
additional support for these institutions, including through an expanded training and technical
assistance initiative.

Working on Behalf of Minority Farmers. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is working
to strengthen programs and increase outreach targeted to underserved communities, including
increasing its lending to minority and women producers. In the past five years there has been a 74
percent increase in direct lending to these groups -- from $46.5 million in FY93 to $81 million in
FY97. Additionally, the Administration is committed to righting any past wrongs by federal
employees and has worked with the Congress in crafting language contained in the Agriculture
Appropriations bill that would waive the two-year statute of limitations on discrimination complaints
against USDA's farm and housing loan programs. This waiver would allow compensation to be
provided to many minority farmers who were victims of discrimination by USDA from the early 1980's
through the 1990's.

Increasing Homeownership. The Clinton Administration launched a program to increase the
homeownership rate of Hispanics in the U.S. through advertising, education and counseling programs
and working with lending institutions to better serve the Hispanic community. Progress has been
made, four million Hispanics, or 44 percent, now own their homes.

Expanding Low-Income Housing Tax Credit by 40 Percent. In 1993, President Clinton fulfilled
his promise to permanently extend the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, spurring the private
development of low-income.housing and helping to build 75,000-90,000 housing units each year.
President Clinton now proposes to expand the credit by 40 percent. Over the next five years,
this expansion will mean an additional 150,000 to 180,000 quality affordable rental units.

Put Forth a "Play-by-the-Rules" Homeownership Initiative and a Homeownership Zones
Initiative. The FY99 budget proposal for the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation includes
$25 million for a new initiative that would make homeownership more accessible to families who
have a good rental history but have difficulty purchasing a home, 10,000 lower-income and
minority families who are currently renting would benefit from this initiative. In addition, the
President's FY99 budget includes $25 million for Homeownership Zones, abandoned housing
and distressed neighborhoods that communities could reclaim using this funding. Funds could
be used for property acquisition, demolition, site preparation, housing construction or
rehabilitation, homeownership counseling, relocation, and activities to further fair housing and
homeownership.


                                FIGHTING FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

Building One America. The President has led the nation in an effort to become One America in the
21 st Century: a place where we respect others' differences and, at the same time, embrace the common
values that unite us. AFL-CIO Executive Vice President Linda Chavez-Thompson served on the
Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race, which the President charged with overseeing this

                                                  3         Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
public outreach efforts -- including holding numerous public meetings and town halls -- to
engage Americans across the nation in this historic effort. One of the critical elements of the
President's Initiative on Race was identifying, highlighting and sharing with the nation promising
practices -- local and national efforts to promote racial reconciliation. The Advisory Board presented
their final report to the President on September 18; 1998, and recommended that conversations on race
continue.

An Administration That Looks like One America. The President appointed the most diverse
Cabinet and Administration in history. Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson and Small Business
Administrator Aida Alvarez are members of the President's Cabinet. Federico Pena and Henry
Cisneros previously served in the President's Cabinet.

Judicial Appointments. Seven percent of all judicial appointments are Hispanics including the
Honorable Jose Cabranes, Judge, Second Circuit US. Circuit Court and the Honorable Hilda Tagle,
Judge, Southern District of Texas, US. District Court.

Senior Level Administration Appointments. President Clinton has appointed more Hispanics to
senior level positions than any President in American history. Eight percent of Presidential
appointments, including boards and commissions, are held by Latinos. These Presidential appointees
include Overseas Private Investment Corporation COPIC) President George Munoz; Norma Cantu,
Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights at the Department of Education; Saul Ramirez, Jr., Department of
Housing and Urban Development Deputy Secretary; Eduardo Gonzalez, Director of the United States
Marshals Service; Eluid Levi Martinez, Commissioner of Bureau of Reclamation at the Department of
Interior; Ida L. Castro, Director of the Women's Bureau of the U.S. Department of Labor and
Chair-designee for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; Patricia T. Montoya,
Commissioner-designee for Children, Youth & Families at the Department of Health and Human
Services; and John U Sepulveda, Deputy Director-designee at the Office of Personnel Management.
White House appointees include: Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff Maria
Echaveste; Assistant to the President and Director ofIntergovemmental Affairs Mickey Ibarra; and
Deputy Assistant to the President and Deputy Director for Legislative Affairs Janet Murguia.

Ordered an Assessment of Affirmative Action Programs. The President ordered a comprehensive
review of the government's affirmative action programs which concluded that affirmative action is still
an effective and important tool to expand educational and economic opportunity to all Americans.
This review of federal affirmative action programs has helped to ensure that these programs are
fair and effective and that they can survive legal challenges. As a result, programs that benefit
Hispanics, including students, working men and women, and business owners, remain in effect
and are more likely to be upheld by the courts.

Increasing Civil Rights Enforcement. On Martin Luther King, Jr., Day, January 19, 1998, Vice
Pre'sident Gore announced the Administration's proposal for the largest single increase in funding to
enforce existing civil rights laws in nearly two decades. Through new reforms and heightened
commitment to enforcement, the Administration will seek to prevent discrimination before it occurs and
to punish those who do discriminate in employment, education, housing and health care, and against

                                                  4               Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
rights enforcement agencies and offices -- an increase of $86 million over last year's funding.

Increasing Funding for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The
cornerstone of the improved civil rights enforcement effort is a $37 million increase (15 percent)
for the EEOC. Through increased use of mediation, improved information technology and an
expanded investigative staff, the EEOC will reduce the average time for resolving private-sector
complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months and cut the backlog of cases from 64,000 to 28,000,
by the year 2000.

Opposed California Prop. 209 and Similar Measures.   The Clinton Administration strongly opposes
state and local initiatives to eliminate affirmative action programs that expand opportunities for
Hispanics and others. The Administration opposed Proposition 209 in California and filed
amicus briefs opposing Prop. 209, which currently prohibits state affirmative action programs. The
Clinton Administration opposed a similar initiative in Houston, which was defeated and is
currently opposing an initiative in Washington that is similar to Prop. 209. In all these cases,
representatives ofthe administration have spoken out strongly against these initiatives as unfair
and a barrier to equality.

Ensuring Election Fairness.  The Clinton Administration defended racially fair redistricting plans
against claims that they were unconstitutional and prevented election day discrimination against
minority voters and voter intimidation and harassment by monitoring polling place activities in a record
number of states and counties. Continued enforcement efforts to ensure that citizens who rely on
Spanish have the same opportunities to participate in voting-related activities as English-speaking
voters.

Oppose English-Only Legislation. Strongly opposed legislation to make English the official language of
the United States which would have jeopardized services and programs for non-English speakers and
jeopardized assistance to the tens of thousands of new immigrants and others seeking to learn English
as adults.

Increasing Voter Registration. During 1995 and 1996, the National Voter Registration Act or "Motor
Voter" law registered nearly 14 million new voters and made voting easier for millions more.
Notably, 1996 saw the highest percentage of voter registration since 1960. [FEC, 6/97]

Opposed California Prop. 187. Opposed California's Proposition 187, which would have made
illegal immigrants ineligible for public school education at alllevels and ineligible for public health
care services.

Working for Fair Housing. To respond to the increase in reported cases of serious fair housing
violations, HUD will double the number of its civil rights enforcement actions by the year 2000.
HUD has also committed $15 million to 67 fair housing centers around the country to assist in
fighting housing discrimination this year. In addition, the President's budget proposes $10
million for a targeted enforcement initiative that will use paired testing -- identical applicants of

                                                     5
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
discrimination.

Defended Fairness. The Clinton Administration has filed more cases between 1993 and 1997 to
enforce fair housing laws than any other Administration (more than 500 cases). For instance, this
Administration desegregated a Vidor, Texas, public housing complex and ordered a Mississippi bank
to implement remedial lending plans for minority customers who were unfairly denied loans by the
bank.

Eliminated Discriminatory "Redlining" Practices. The Clinton Administration negotiated
agreements with health care agencies to eliminate discriminatory "redlining" practices denying
home health care services based on residential location.

Working to Ensure a Fair and Accurate Census. The Clinton Administration is working to
ensure that Census 2000 is the most accurate census possible using the best, most up-to-date scientific
methods as recommended by the National Academy of Sciences. According to the Census Bureau, the
1990 Census missed 8.4 million people and double-counted 4.4 million others. Nationally, 5 percent
of Hispanics were not counted in the 1990 census. While missing or miscounting so many people is a
problem, the fact that certain groups -- such as children, the poor, people of color, city dwellers and
people who live in rural rental homes -- were missed more often than others made the undercount even
more inaccurate. A fair and accurate Census is a fundamental part of a representative democracy
and is the basis for providing equality under the law. The President is determined to have a fair
and full count in 2000.


                                            IMMIGRATION


Fairness for Immigrants. The President worked with Congress to correct the most egregious impacts
of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996. As a result, almost a
million people will be able to proceed with legalizing their immigration status under the former
standards of immigration law and not the new, stricter and more burdensome standards enacted in
1996.

Restoring Food Stamp Benefits for Legal Immigrants. In June 1998, the President signed the
Agricultural Research Act into law, which restores food stamp benefits to 250,000 elderly, disabled,
and other needy legal immigrants, including 75,000 children, who lawfully resided in the U.S. as of
August 22, 1996, and lost assistance as a result of cuts in the 1996 welfare law that had nothing to do
with welfare reform. It restores benefits to Hmong immigrants from Laos who aided our country
during the Vietnam War and extends the period during which refugees and asylees may qualify for
Food Stamps while they await citizenship. This law funds a significant part of the President's 1999
budget proposal to restore food stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants, but the President's budget
proposal would go further by covering families with children regardless of the date they entered the
U.S. This restoration builds on the President's success last year in restOring 55! and Medicaid to
420,000 legal immigrants whose benefits were also terminated in welfare reform (see below).


                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                   6
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Receiving Benefits. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored $11.5 billion in SSI and Medicaid
benefits for legal immigrants whose benefits were also tenninated in welfare refonn. This law
protects those immigrants now receiving assistance, ensuring that they will not be turned out of their
apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left destitute. And for immigrants already here but not
receiving benefits, the BBA does not change the rules retroactively. Immigrants in the country as of
August 22, 1996, but not receiving benefits at that time who subsequently become disabled will also be
fully eligible for SSI and Medicaid benefits. When the President signed the 1996 Welfare Refonn Law,
he pledged to go back and change provisions that have nothing to do with welfare refonn, such as the
cutting off benefits to legal immigrants. Critics said the changes would never be made. However, in
1997 and again in 1998, the President followed through on his pledge -- and won many of the changes
he sought in the 1996 law.

Strengthening the Naturalization Process. The President has made naturalization a top priority of
the Immigration and Naturalization Service in order to continue fostering legal immigration while
combating illegal immigration. For instance, over one million individuals were naturalized in 1996.
The Administration continues to work to streamline and improve the naturalization process so that
eligible individuals who have played by the rules can become full partners in America. In FY99, the
Administration is seeking an infusion of new resources to reduce the backlog of naturalization
applications and improve customer service.

Defended Immigrant Rights. The Administration defeated legislative efforts which would have
significantly eroded health care for immigrants. The bipartisan agreement strengthened the
sponsorship requirement while preserving the basic ability of families to reunify.


                                            EDUCATION


Made the Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years. Maintaining his longtime commitment to
education, the President enacted the largest investment in education in 30 years -- and the largest
investment in higher education since the G.!. Bill -- by signing the 1997 Balanced Budget Act.

Put Forward a Hispanic Education Action Plan. The Hispanic dropout rate is 2.5 times the rate
for African Americans and 3.5 times the rate for white non-Hispanics. The Administration is
reaching out to Hispanic youth, encouraging them to stay in school, graduate from high school,
and go on to college so that they can compete successfully for good jobs and take advantage of
promising career opportunities. As part of these efforts, the Clinton Administration put forth a
$600 million Hispanic Education Action Plan. This initiative will provide the investments
needed to help Hispanic students master basic skills and become proficient in English. It will
also assist schools in implementing reforms to reduce dropout rates, enable adults to receive
basic skills training and participate in English-as-a-second-Ianguage programs, and offer
assistance to colleges and universities that serve large numbers of Hispanic students.




                                                  7               Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
an 11 percent increase for Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs), colleges and universities with at least
25 percent Hispanic enrollments.

Established a Hispanic Advisory Commi.ssion. In 1994, the President issued an Executive Order on
Educational Excellence for Hispanics which established an advisory commission to oversee the
improvement in education for Hispanics and would work to ensure that Hispanic-Serving Institutions
will have more input regarding educational goals and issues of concern to Hispanics. The
Commission's report identified contributing factors impacting attainment of educational excellence,
corrective policy actions, and plans for program development and funding ..

Implemented the Student Diversity Partnership Program. Partnered with Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities, National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, an Indian
Science and Engineering Society and the Center for the Advancement of Hispanics in Science and
Engineering Education to implement the Student Diversity Partnership Program. This program will
ensure an adequate supply of diverse and qualified scientists and engineers for the 21 st century. In
addition, the White House recently awarded Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science,
Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring Grants to both individual mentors and institutions that
foster mentoring, helping to ensure that America's future scientists and engineers come from
all of the nation's racial and cultural segments ofthe population.

AmeriCorps College Support. Since 1993, more than 100,000 people have had the opportunity to
serve through AmeriCorps, with Hispanics comprising 13 percent of all participants (1996 data). This
year alone, nearly 50,000 young people will take advantage of the opportunity to serve and will earn an
award of up to $4,725 to pay for college or repay student loans.

Expanding Investments In Youth Education And Training. One of the President's top priorities is
fighting efforts by Congress to eliminate both the Summer Jobs Program, which provides jobs to
roughly 530,000 disadvantaged young people, and the new Youth Opportunity Area Initiative, which
would help provide job training and help finding jobs for up to 50,000 youth in the poorest
communities nationwide. The Summer Jobs programs provides an estimated 25 percent of the
summer jobs held by African American 14-15 years olds and at least 16 percent held by Hispanic
14-15 year olds. The Youth Opportunity Area Initiative program provides high school dropouts
between the ages of 16 and 24 with academic and job-skills training, as well as apprenticeships
building and rehabilitating affordable housing.

Expanding College Opportunity with Tuition Tax Credits, Education IRAs, and Largest
In·crease in Pell Grants in 20 Years. The President is making the first two years of college
universally available with $1500 HOPE Scholarship credits and a 20 percent tax credit helps offset
tuition costs for college or lifetime learning. The expanded IRA allows penalty- and tax-free
withdrawals for education. And, in the coming school year, nearly 4 million students will receive a
Pell Grant of up to $3,000,30 percent larger than when the President took office. In the 1995-96
school year, 54 percent of all Hispanic students enrolled full-time in college received a Pell Grant.

Increased Bilingual Education by 35 Percent. Last year (FY97) in the Balanced Budget

                                                    8         Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
bilingual education funding will help school districts teach English to more than a million
limited-English proficient children, as well as provide some 4,000 teachers with the training they need
to do their jobs better. The Immigrant Education program will help more than a thousand school
districts provide supplemental instructional services to 875,000 recent immigrant students. And, the
President's FY99 budget proposal includes an increase of $33 million for Bilingual and Immigrant
Education.

Helping More Children in Elementary and Secondary Schools. In 1994, President Clinton
reformed Title I -- the major elementary and secondary program for disadvantaged children --
clearing away barriers that had prevented limited-English proficient children from getting help.
Now Hispanics are 32 percent of the children served in Title I.

Modernizing Our Schools. The President is working to pass federal tax credits to help rebuild,
modernize, and build over 5,000 public schools nationwide.

Reducing Class Size. The President is pressing Congress to enact his proposal to reduce class size to a
national average of 18 students in grades 1-3, by helping local schools hire an additional 100,000
well-prepared teachers. Research shows that minorities, and low-income students in particular,
benefit academically from smaller classes.

Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade. More than 1000 colleges have committed
work-study students to tutor children in reading, and thousands of AmeriCorps members and senior
volunteers are organizing volunteer reading campaigns. In addition, the President is working to enact
an early literacy bill such as the America Reads Initiative that will provide more tutors after school,
improve the teaching of reading in our schools, and help parents help their children learn to read.

Greater Access to Education Technology. The President has made an unprecedented
commitment to bringing technology into the classroom and has called for technology training for
teachers and expanded access for teachers and students to computers in the classroom. As a
part of this effort, the Clinton Administration secured an e-rate (discounts worth over $2.5 billion
every year) for schools, libraries, rural health clinics and hospitals to connect to the Internet.

Proposing Education Opportunity Zones. The President proposed $1.5 billion, over five years,
to bolster reform efforts by high-poverty urban and rural school districts that demonstrate both
a commitment to, and a track record in, improving educational achievement. Funds will be
used to improve accountability, turn around failing schools, recognize outstanding teachers, deal
with ineffective ones and expand public school choice. Added investments in these communities
will accelerate progress and provide successful models of system-wide, standards-based reform.

Working to Pass the High Hopes for College Initiative. The High Hopes for College Initiative will
inspire more young people to have high expectations, to stay in school and study hard, and to go to
college. The Clinton Administration is working to pass this initiative which makes a long-term
investment -- starting with $140 million in FY99 -- to promote partnerships between colleges and
middle or junior high schools in low-income communities. The President's High Hopes program will

                                                   9
                                                                     Automated Records Management Systen,
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
to raise education expectations and eliminate barriers to college.


                                       CHILDREN AND FAMILIES


Eliminating Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities. President Clinton has announced a $400
million initiative to end racial and ethnic health disparities. The effort sets a national goal of
eliminating the longstanding disparities by the year 2010 in six key health areas: infant mortality,
diabetes, cancer screening and management, heart disease, AIDS and immunizations. There are major
health disparities among Hispanics. Latinos are nearly twice as likely to develop diabetes than
non-Latinos and Latinos have two to three times the rate of stomach cancer as white Americans. The
President announced a five-step plan -- led by Surgeon General and Assistant Secretary for
Health Dr. David Satcher -- to mobilize the resources and expertise of the Federal government,
the private sector, and local communities.

Focused Health Efforts. Established the Office of the Minority Health Research and Alternative
Medicine at the National Institutes of Health. Helped communities develop culturally-competent
systems of care for children with serious emotional disturbances through the Comprehensive Mental
Health Services for Children and Families program. Negotiated agreements with hospitals and
nursing homes to eliminate barriers to equal access for minorities based on language.

Fighting to Pass a Strong, Enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights. President Clinton has called on the
Congress to pass a strong, enforceable patients' bill of rights that assures Americans the quality health
care they need. The bill should include important patient protections such as: assuring direct access to
specialists; real emergency room protections; continuity of care provisions that protect patients from
abrupt changes in treatment; a fair, timely, and independent appeals process for patient grievances; and
enforcement provisions to make these rights real.

Protected and Strengthened Medicare. The Balanced Budget Act extended the life of the Medicare
Trust Fund for at least a decade; expanded choices in health plans; and provided beneficiaries new
preventive benefits. Six percent of all beneficiaries currently enrolled in Medicare are Hispanic. The
President has also put forth a new proposal that will provide greater access to health insurance for
Americans ages 55 to 65, including an option to buy into Medicare.

Extended Health Care to Millions of Children with the Children's Health Insurance Program
(CHIP). Because of the President's leadership, the Balanced Budget included $24 billion to provide
real health care coverage to up to five million more children, the largest children's health care budget
increase since Medicaid was created in 1965. Minority children make up a disproportionate number
of the over 10 million uninsured children. African American children make up 25 percent and
Hispanic children make up 30 percent of all uninsured children -- more than twice their percentage of
the overall population. The Administration is actively reaching out to communities to target and
enroll eligible, uninsured children in CHIP.

Protecting Families. The Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) enables workers to take up to 12

                                                   10           Automated Records Management Systen
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Millions of workers have already benefited from FMLA since its enactment. The President also
proposed expanding the Family & Medical Leave Act to allow workers up to 24 hours per year of
unpaid leave for parent-teacher conferences or routine medical care for a child.

Increased WIC -- $1 Billion Higher. Under President Clinton, participation in the Special
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) has expanded by 1.7 million
-- from 5.7 million in 1993 to 7.4 million women, infants, and children in 1998, with funding rising
from $2.9 billion to $3.9 billion. The President's budget proposes $4.1 billion in WIC funding to
serve 7.5 million women, infants, and children in 1999, fulfilling his goal of full participation in WIC.
 Research shows that every $1 increase in the prenatal care portion of the WIC program cuts between
$1.77 and $3.90 in medical expenses in the first 60 days following childbirth. In 1996,30 percent of
the infants who benefited from WIC were Hispanic.

Expanded Head Start By Nearly 60 Percent -- Over $1.5 Billion Higher Per Year. Since 1993,
President Clinton has expanded Head Start by 57 percent, from $2.8 billion in FY93 to $4.4 billion in
FY98. Of the estimated 830,000 children now enrolled in Head Start, 26 percent of the children are of
Hispanic origin. The President's FY99 Budget increases Head Start funding by $313 mi Ilion, which
would mean Head Start funding would be 68 percent higher in 1999 than in 1993. The President is on
track to meet his goal of having one million children enrolled in Head Start.

Proposed the Largest Single Investment in Child Care in the Nation's History. The President's
$21 billion child care proposal will give child care subsidies to millions of children and increase
tax credits for three million working families to help them pay for child care.

Providing After-School Opportunities for Up to Half a Million Children a Year. Last year, the
President fought for, and won, a $40 million expansion of the 21st Century Community Learning
Centers program. Building on the success of this program, the President's FY99 budget includes a $200
million major expansion, which will provide safe and educational after-school opportunities for up to
500,000 school-age children in rural and urban communities across the country.


                                           FIGHTING CRIME

White House Conference on Hate Crimes. President Clinton hosted the first White House
Conference on Hate Crimes, which examined laws and remedies that can make a difference in
preventing hate crimes, highlighted solutions that are working in communities across the country, and
continued the frank and open dialogue needed to build One America. The President announced
significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get tough on hate crimes, including:
support for legislation to expand the federal hate crimes law to cover crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender, or disability; the creation of a network of local hate crime working groups;
the addition of approximately 50 FBI agents and federal prosecutors to enforce hate crimes laws;
improved collection of data on hate crimes; and the production of materials to educate the public
-- especially youth -- about hate crimes.
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex.DUIIlP Conversion
                                                   11
the Hate Crimes Sentencing Enhancement Act which provides for longer sentences where the offense
is determined to be a hate crime.

FaIling Crime Rates. Violent crime is down six years in a row, the longest period of decline since
1960. Juvenile crime, which had been exploding, has declined 2 years in a row. Property and violent
crime victimization rates are at their lowest levels in nearly 25 years.

Putting 100,000 New Police on the Streets and Providing COPS Grants to Underserved Areas.
The President's Crime Bill, through the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program, has
already funded nearly 80,000 new officers. As a part of the COPS Program, the President announced
new grants to increase police presence and community policing in underserved neighborhoods. Under
this initiative, 18 cities will share $106 million to hire 620 new community policing officers. The
pilot cities were selected following an analysis of crime, demographic and economic data.

Promoting Community Prosecutions. The President's FY99 budget includes $50 million for grants
to promote community prosecution, which builds on effective community policing strategies. The
funds will enable local prosecutors across the country to playa more active role in crime fighting by
spending more time in their neighborhoods, both helping to solve crimes and preventing them before
they happen.


                                  SAFE AND CLEAN ENVIRONMENT


Environmental Justice and Redevelopment. The Clinton Administration issued an Executive Order
on Environmental Justice to ensure that low-income citizens and minorities do not suffer a
disproportionate burden of industrial pollution. The Administration identified pilot projects to be
undertaken across the country to redevelop contaminated sites in low-income communities, tum them
into useable space, create jobs and enhance community development.

Issued Toughest New Air Quality Standards in a Generation. The Clinton Administration issued
new air quality standards for smog and soot that will prevent 15,000 premature deaths a year and
improve the lives of millions of Americans who suffer from respiratory illnesses.

Cleaning Up Toxic Waste Sites and Redeveloping Brownfields. This Administration has cleaned
up twice as many Superfund sites in less than six years as previous administrations did in twelve. To
date, the Administration has awarded 228 Brownfields grants, for over $42 million, to states, cities,
towns, counties, and tribes. These grants have leveraged nearly $1 billion for redevelopment of
industrial sites and created over 2,000 jobs.


Providing Safe Drinking Water. The President proposed and signed legislation to strengthen the
Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that our families have healthy, clean tap water. The Administration
required America's 55,000 water utilities companies to provide regular reports to their customers on
the quality of their drinking water.

                                                  12
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in an environmentally strong and economically sound way. The
President's has proposed a five-year $6.3 billion package of tax incentives and research investment to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.

Protecting Our Natural Treasures. The Clinton Administration has protected or enhanced
nearly 150 million acres of public and private lands, from the red rock canyons of Utah to the
Florida Everglades. And the Administration has recently reached agreements to protect
Yellowstone from mining and save the ancient redwoods of California's Headwaters Forest.


                                       AMERICAN LEADERSHIP


Democracy for Cuba. The Clinton Administration increased efforts to promote a peaceful,
democratic transition in Cuba by keeping pressure on the Castro government for change while reaching
out to the Cuban people. The President has strengthened international consensus on the need for
action to promote human rights and democracy. Responding to the Pope's historic visit to Cuba, the
Clinton Administration authorized humanitarian measures to alleviate the Cuban people's suffering,
helping them to prepare for a democratic future and increase contact.

Support Our Closest Neighbors. The Administration took decisive action in assembling a financial
support package for Mexico. The President's leadership prevented a prolonged financial crisis in
Mexico and its spread to other Latin American countries. In addition, the President traveled to Latin
America and launched hemispheric negotiations for Free Trade Area of the Americas.


                                                                                                    9/98




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                  13
                         Supporting Women and Families


EXPANDING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES:

    Protecting Families. The Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) enables workers to take up to 12
    weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing family member without jeopardizing their job.
    Millions of workers have already benefited from FMLA since its enactment. The President also
    proposed expanding the Family & Medical Leave Act to allow workers up to 24 hours per year of
    unpaid leave for parent-teacher conferences or routine medical care for a chi Id.
·   Cutting Taxes for 15 Million Working Families by extending the Earned Income Tax Credit
    (EITC). In 1997, the EITC lifted 4.3 million people, including 2.2 million children, out of poverty
    -- double the number of people lifted out of poverty by the EITC in 1993.
·   Increasing the Minimum Wage from $4.25 to $5.15, giving six million women a raise.
·   Narrowing the Wage Gap. Last year, the median earnings of women working full-time increased
    3 percent. In 1997, the median earnings of women represented 74 percent of the median earnings
    for men, remaining the narrowest gap ever.
    Fighting for Paycheck Equity. Called on Congress to pass legislation to strengthen laws
    prohibiting wage discrimination.
    Highest Homeownership Rate in History. There are more than 68 million American families
    who own homes, more than six million new homeowners since the President took office. Women's
    homeownership is increasing at a faster rate than the rest of the country -- up five percent since the
    first quarter of 1994.
·   Increasing Pension Security. Fought for legislation that has expanded pension coverage, made
    pensions more secure for 40 million American workers and retirees, and simplified pension plan
    administration. Promoting new efforts to encourage retirement savings.
·   Saving Social Security First. In 1999, nearly 60 percent of all Social Security beneficiaries wi 11
    be women. Social Security will be the major source of retirement income for a majority of these
    women. President Clinton is committed to saving Social Security for the 21 st Century and has
    urged that budget surpluses be reserved for a bipartisan plan to strcngthen Social Security.


CARING FOR OUR CHILDREN:
·  Extending Health Care to Millions of Children with the Children's Health Insurance Program
   (CHIP). This is the single largest investment in Health Care for children since 1965. The President
   fought to ensure that the Balanced Budget included $24 billion to provide real health care coverage
   to millions of uninsured children.
·  Fought for and Won $500 Child Tax Credit for 26 Million Families with Over 40 Million
   Children under Age 17. Twelve million children from families with income below $30,000 will
   receive the child tax credit as a result of the President's efforts.
· Largest Four-Year Drop in Child Poverty Since 19605. Under President Clinton, the child poverty
   rate has declined from 22.7 percent to 19.9 percent -- the biggest four-year drop in nearly 30 years
   (1965-1969). While this marks significant progress, President Clinton will continue to fight for
   policies that help to raise incomes and reduce poverty.
·  Ensuring Safe Food for America's Families, making food safety a priority. Issued new standards
   to reduce and prevent contamination of meat, poultry, and seafood; signed the Food Quality
   Protection Act with special safeguards for kids; issued new regulations that improve the safety of
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex.Dump Conversion
    comprehensive food safety strategic plan for federal agencies.
·   Held First-Ever White House Conference on Child Care and White House Conference on
    Early Child Development and Learning. In April 1997, the President and First Lady held the
    White House Conference on Early Child Development and Learning to highlight the benefits of
    early nurturing by parents. And in October 1997, the White House Conference on Child Care
    began a dialogue on the child care challenges facing parents today -- availability, affordability, and
    assuring safety and quality.
·   Proposed the Largest Single Investment in Child Care in the Nation's History. Between FY93
    and FY97, federal funding for child care increased by nearly 79 percent, providing child care
    services for over one million children. If enacted, the President's $21 billion child care proposal will
    give child care subsidies to millions of children and increase tax credits for three million working
    families to help them pay for child care.
    Signed Landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. This law will help thousands of children
    waiting in foster care move more quickly into safe and pennanent homes.
    Signed the Comprehensive Childhood Immunization Initiative. Thanks to President Clinton,
    immunization rates among two-year-olds have reached historic highs.
·   Took Steps to Ensure Children Have Safe Medications. Unveiled an FDA regulation that
    protects children by requiring manufacturers to study appropriate dosage levels of drugs for
    pediatric populations.
·   Launched New Strategies to Reduce the High Rate of Teen Pregnancies. Teen (aged 15 to 19
    years) births have fallen six years in a row, by 12 percent from 1991 to 1996.
    Increased Child Support Collections by Nearly 70%. Signed into law the toughest child support
    crackdown in history.
·   Imposed Strict Measures to Keep Cigarettes out of the Hands of Our Children by restricting
    youth-targeted advertising; and the FDA made 18 the minimum age to purchase tobacco products
    nationwide, requiring photo I.D.s for anyone under the age of27. And the President is fighting to
    enact comprehensive tobacco legislation.


INVESTING IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING:

·   Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years. Maintaining his longtime commitment to
    education, the President enacted the largest investment in education in 30 years -- and the largest
    investment in higher education since the G.!. Bill -- by signing the 1997 Balanced Budget Act.
    Providing Early Education to More than 830,000 Children with Head Start. 200,000 more
    children are enrolled in Head Start today than in 1992.
·   Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade. More than 1000 colleges have committed
    work-study students to tutor children in reading, and thousands of AmeriCorps members and senior
    volunteers are organizing volunteer reading campaigns. In addition, the President is working to
    enact an early literacy bill such as the America Reads Initiative that will provide more tutors after
    school, improve the teaching of reading in our schools, and help parents help their children learn to
    read.
·   Fighting for Critical Education Investments. The President has called on Congress to pass
    critical education priorities included in his FY99 Budget that include initiatives to recruit quality
    teachers, rebuild crumbling schools and reduce class size.


·   Striving for Excellence with National Education Standards. Seeking high national standards for
                                                                      Automated Records Management Systen,
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
    math.
·   Expanding Choice and Accountability in Public Schools. Supported increase of public charter
    schools, from only one charter school in the nation in 1993 to more than 1,000 charter schools this
    year.
·   Promoting National Service and educational opportunities through AmeriCorps.
·   Fought for Passage of Education Tax Breaks to Promote Lifelong Learning. Representing the
    largest single increase in higher education since the G.!. Bill, the Balanced Budget includes a $1,500
    Hope Scholarship to make the first two years of college universally available, and a 20-percent
    tuition tax credit for college juniors, seniors, graduate students, and working Americans pursuing
    lifelong learning.
·     Largest Increase in Pell Grants in 20 Years. Nearly 4 million students will receive a Pell
    Grant of up to $3,000, 30% larger than when the President took office.

IMPROVING OUR NATION'S HEALTH:

    Protected and Strengthened Medicare, Benefiting the 22 Million American Women Enrolled
    in Medicare. The Balanced Budget Act extended the life of the Medicare Trust Fund for at least a
    decade; expanded choices in health plans; and provided beneficiaries new preventive benefits,
    including more affordable annual mammograms for all beneficiaries, cervical cancer screening, and
    tests to help detect osteoporosis. The President has also put forth a new proposal that wi II provide
    greater access to health insurance for Americans ages 55 to 65, including an option to buy into
    Medicare.
·   Increased Funding for Breast Cancer Research. Since the President took office, funding for
    breast cancer research, prevention and treatment has doubled, from about $275 million in FY 1993
    to $577 million in the President's FY 1999 budget. In addition, the President has implemented the
    Mammography Quality Standards Act to ensure the quality of mammograms. Women can now
    find a certified mammography facility by calling 1-800-4-CANCER.
·   Providing Protection with the Patients' Bill of Rights. The President is calling on Congress to
    pass Federally enforceable consumer health care protections that include: guaranteed access to
    needed health care specialists including direct access to an OB-GYN; access to emergency room
    services when and where the need arises; continuity of care protections to ensure that patients' care
    will not abruptly change if their provider is dropped; access to a timely internal and independent
    external appeals process for consumers to resolve their differences with their health plans; a limit on
    financial incentives to doctors to limit care and assurances that doctors and patients can openly
    discuss treatment options. Women are particularly vulnerable without these health care protections
    because they are greater users of health care services, they make three-quarters of the health care
    decisions fortheir families, and they have specific health care needs that are directly addressed by a
    patients' bill of rights.
·   Preventing Discrimination Based on Genetic Information Both by Health Plans and
    Employers. Urging Congress to pass bipartisan legislation to prohibit health plans from
    inappropriately using genetic screening information to deny coverage, set premiums, or to
    distribute confidential information. The President also has supported legislation that ensures
    that employers do not use genetic information to discriminate against employees.



·   Fought for Greater Health Security for America's Families. The President signed into law the
    Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act which helps millions of Americans who move
                                                                    Automated Records Management Systel,
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
    their health insurance.
·   Endorsed Legislation That Would Ban Drive-thru Mastectomies, allowing women to stay in the
    hospital at least 48 hours following a mastectomy.
·   Ended Drive-Thru Deliveries. Proposed and signed into law legislation requiring insurers to
    cover at least 48 hours of a post-natal hospital stay (72 hours for a Cesarean).


MAKING OUR HOMES AND COMMUNITIES SAFER:

    Putting 100,000 More Police on the Streets. At this time, nearly 80,000 officers have been
    funded through the 1994 Crime Bill, on the way to 100,000 more police on the streets and in our
    communities. And violent crime has dropped six years in a row - the longest period of decline in
    60 years.
    Signed the Assault Weapons Ban, the Brady Bill and an Extension of Brady into Law. The
    Brady Law has already kept handguns away from 250,000 persons including felons, fugitives and
    individuals convicted of domestic violence misdemeanors or who are under restraining orders. The
    President signed into law the extension of the Brady Law, which prohibits anyone convicted of a
    domestic violence offense -- misdemeanor or felony -- from owning or possessing a firearm.
    Will Hold the First-Ever White House Conference on School Safety. On Octobcr 15, 1998, the
    President will host the White House Conference on School Safety. The participants will explore
    solutions to this national challenge: How do schools, families and communities work together to
    make sure that every child is safe in every school in America.
    Signed Megan's Law and the Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent
    Offender Registration Act, requiring states to set up sex offender registration systems and allows
    community notification when sex offenders move into neighborhoods.                           .
·   Championed and Signed the Violence Against Women Act, the cornerstone of the President's
    efforts to fight domestic violence, and created an office at the Department of Justice dedicated to
    combating violence against women.
·   More than Tripled Funding to Domestic Violence Shelters and instituted new penalties against
    men who stalk, threaten or abuse women across state lines.
·   Established Nationwide 24-Hour Domestic Violence Hotline. The hotline (1-800-797-SAFE)
    provides immediate crisis intervention, counseling and referrals for those in need. Since the hotline
    opened, there have been 229,000 calls -- averaging 8,000 calls a month -- from all 50 States, the
    District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.


PROMOTING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES FOR WOMEN:

·   Reversed the "Gag Rule" limiting the information federally funded family planning clinics could
    give to women.
·   Greater Support for Family Planning. The President's FY99 proposal will increase Title X
    Family Planning grants by $15 million -- a 46 percent increase since FY92.
·   Signed the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, establishing a safety-zone around
    women's health clinics.
                                                                         Automated Records Management System
STRENGTHENING EQUAL EMPLOYMENT PROTECTIONS:                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

·   Increasing Civil Rights Enforcement. Proposed for the largest single increase in funding to ,
                                                                        )1<.",," h,-,,;,Ji; Management S>,SI'
                                                                       ,-Dump Conversion
    commitment to enforcement, the Administration will seek to prevent discrimination before it occurs
    and to punish those who do discriminate in employment, education, housing and health care, and
    against those with disabilities. The Clinton Administration's FY99 budget contains $602
    million for civil rights enforcement agencies and offices -- an increase of $86 million over last
    year's funding.
o   Increasing Funding for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The
    cornerstone of the improved civil rights enforcement effort is a $37 million increase (15
    percent) for the EEOC. Through increased use of mediation, improved information
    technology and an expanded investigative staff, the EEOC will reduce the average time for
    resolving private-sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months and cut the backlog of
    cases from 64,000 to 28,000, by the year 2000.


GENERATING MORE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN:

o   Women Are Starting Businesses at Twice the Rate of All Businesses. Women own nearly 40
    percent of all firms in the United States. These eight million women-owned firms employ 18.5
    million --one in every five U.S. workers - and contribute $2.3 trillion to the economy. The Small
    Business Administration's Office of Women's Business Ownership is working to foster this growth.
o   Tripled the Number of Small Business Loans to Women Entrepreneurs. Between 1993 and
    1997 the SBA approved nearly 50,000 loans to women entrepreneurs under the 7(a) and 504 loan
    programs. Last year alone, the Small Business Administration granted more than 10,000 loans,
    worth $1.67 billion, to women small business owners, triple the number of loans granted in 1992.


WOMEN AS PARTNERS IN DECISION MAKING:

    Appointed More Women than Any Other President -- 41 percent of Administration appointees
    are women.
o   Women Hold 29 Percent of the Top Positions -- 29 percent of the positions requiring Senate
    confirmation (PAS) are held by women. Additionally,
    ~      34 percent of Presidential appointments, including boards and commissions, are held by
           women.
    ~      39 percent of non-career Senior Executive Service positions are held by women.
    ~      58 percent of Schedule C positions are held by women.
    Appointed the First Women Ever to Serve as Attorney General, Janet Reno, and Secretary of
    State, Madeleine Albright. Including the Attorney General and Secretary of State, women make
    up 27 percent of the Clinton Cabinet: Alexis Hennan, Secretary of Labor; Donna Shalala,
    Secretary of Health and Human Services; Carol Browner, Administrator of the Environmental
    Protection Agency; Janet Yellen, Chair of the Council of Economic Advisors; and Charlene
    Barshefsky, United States Trade Representative all serve in the President's Cabinet.
    30 Percent of All of the President's Judicial Nominees Are Women.
                                                                                                Nomin
                                                                                                ated
                                                                                                the
                                                                                                Seeon
                                          Automated Records Management System                   d
                                          Hex-Dump Conversion                                   Woma
                                      Serve
                                      on the
                                      Supre
                                      me
                                      Court.

                                      During
                                      his
                                      first
                                      year III
                                      office,
                                      Preside
                                      nt
                                      Clinto
                                      n
                                      nomma
                                      ted
                                      Ruth
                                      Bader
                                      Ginsbu
                                      rg to
                                      the
                                      United
                                      States
                                      Supre
                                      me
                                      Court.
                                      Justice
                                      Ginsbu
                                      rg IS
                                      only
                                      the
                                      second
                                      woman
                                      to
                                      serve
                                      on the
                                      nation'
                                      s
                                      highest
                                      court.


                                      9/98


Automated Records Management System
Hex-Dump Conversion


