      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-0CT-1998 14:00:46.00

      SUBJECT:    for the SOTU

      TO: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Consumer activist Ralph Nader
      requests referendum to settle
      Clinton matter


      Copyright    1998 Nando.net
      Copyright    1998 U.S. Newswire

      Check out Nando Media's complete coverage and readers'
      forum of the Kenneth Starr investigation.

      WASHINGTON (October 2, 1998 1:32 p.m. EDT
      http://www.nandotimes.com) -- The following was released
      Thursday by Ralph Nader:

  Memorandum

  TO:       President William Jefferson Clinton

  Representative Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the House
  of Representatives

  Senator Trent Lott, Majority Leader, U.S. Senate

  Senator Thomas A. Daschle, Minority Leader, U.S.
  Senate

  Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Minority
  Leader, House of Representatives

  FROM: Ralph Nader

  P.O. Box 19312

  Washington, DC 20036

  202-387-8034

  RE: National Advisory Referendum

  DATE: October 1, 1998
    ...

 There is growing consternation throughout our
 country that the prolonged impeachment
 inquiry/hearings/trial process will divide, deplete and
 demoralize the nation no matter which way it turns
 out.

  Both sides on this Clinton/Lewinsky matter are
  repeatedly referring to the opinions of the people to
  justify their courses of action. The Democratic
  partisans cite the polls as supporting no
  impeachment process with the President remaining
  in office. But there are polls for the Republican
. partisans as well, showing damage to the Democrats
  running for election because of this scandal.

There is a way out of the inevitable incriminations,
opportunity costs and other unintended
consequences that are harmful to the body politic and
to many important decisions that our government
must make in the coming months. The way is for the
Congress and the White House to enact legislation
that provides for an advisory national referendum on
election day in November, when the polls are to be
open for regular elections, to decide the matter. The
legislation would provide that the two branches of
government would agree to abide by the decision --
an up or down vote on President Clinton staying in
office to settle the controversy over the Lewinsky
affair and the Starr Report's allegations.

 The advantages of the advisory referendum are (1)
 The subject matter is not complicated and raises
 issues that the people are quite as qualified as their
 representatives to decide. (This is not a matter of
 complicated finance, technology or foreign relations;
 it affects the most fundamental of ethical judgments
 on matters of human behavior that are not unique and
 quite familiar to the millions of voters.) (2) The
 materials are widely available to read, view and
 digest at no expense to the electorate. (3) An
 advisory referendum will provide the citizens of this
 country with a sense of participation in an age when
 so many of them believe they are shut out or
 excluded from any voice or impact on public issues.

Finally, there is an accepted decisiveness to a
referendum that may limit the recriminations and
bitterness that will accompany a contested
deliberation stemming from personally-based
misbehavior by the President. This proposal need
not be viewed as any precedent, first because the
legislation would just provide for one such
referendum pursuant to an agreement by the parties
to abide by the results and, second, because of the
uniquely personal kind of behavior that is to be
judged. Were this proposal to be adopted, we can be
assured of a date certain to "put this matter behind
us" on the evening of November 3, 199B. For the
people, informed as never before, will have spoken in
numbers that will surely reverse the lower and lower
     "   ..
turnouts at the polls in recent decades. A reversal of
that trend can only be healthy for our democracy.

Please see the attached draft legislation.



National Advisory Referendum Act

Procedures are established under this Act for the
establishment of a National Advisory Referendum.

(a) Statement of Purpose. Congress finds that:

(1) citizens are becoming increasingly disenchanted
with the extended inquiry into the Clinton/Lewinsky
matter, and the allegations contained in the report of
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, which is
crowding out other issues of national import;

(2) the availability of a non-binding National Advisory
Referendum to appear on the national ballot on
November 3, 1998 would allow citizens to express
their will and make elected representatives more
responsive to their wishes.

(b) Procedures:

(1) Congress shall direct any state, commonwealth or
territory receiving federal funds to place a
non-binding referendum on the ballot for the national
elections to be held in November of 1998.

(2) The referendum shall pose to the electorate the
following question which shall be answered with a
"Yes" or a "No": Should President William Jefferson
Clinton remain in office?

(3) The states, commonwealth and territories shall
tabulate the results of the National Advisory
Referendum as soon as practicable and transmit
such results to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives no later than 7 days after Election
Day. The Speaker shall, within 10 days after Election
Day, compile, total and publish the results.

(4) The National Advisory Referendum shall not be
binding on any branch or agency of government or
any other person or entity. However, it shall stand as
a statement of the will of the people, and Government
officials and elected representatives should act to
implement the National Advisory Referendum results
in exercising their duties.

0:
   \~




