RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/o=EOP         OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-0CT-1998 11:23:01.00

SUBJECT:   Draft SAP: H.R. 4570 - Omnibus National Parks and Public Lands Act

TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jessica L. Gibson ( CN=Jessica L. Gibson/OU=WHOIO=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles M. Brain ( CN=Charles M. Brain/OU=WHOIO=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHOIO=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/o=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.    ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Wesley P. Warren ( CN=Wesley P. Warren/OU=CEQ/o=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elizabeth Gore ( CN=Elizabeth GoreIOU=OMB/o=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mindy E. Myers ( CN=Mindy E. Myers/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Dario J. Gomez ( CN=Dario J. Gomez/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa M. Kountoupes ( CN=Lisa M. Kountoupes/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kevin S. Moran ( CN=Kevin S. Moran/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett    ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHOlo=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Judy Jablow ( CN=Judy Jablow/Ou=CEQ/o=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Linda Lance ( CN=Linda Lance/OU=CEQ/o=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
On 9/29/98, Secretary Babbitt sent a letter to the House Resources
Committee stating that he and the Chair of CEQ would recommend veto.  The
position has been elevated in the House SAP to "Senior Advisers would
recommend veto." House floor action is expected Tuesday, October 6th.
Please review the SAP and provide comments by Monday afternoon so that we
can release the SAP in advance.  Thank you.



DRAFT -- NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
October I, 1998
         (House)

H.R. 4570 - Omnibus National Parks and Public Lands Act of 1998
(Rep. Hansen (R) UT)


For the reasons outlined below, the President's senior advisers will
recommend that the President veto H.R. 4570 if the bill is presented to
him in its current form.

H.R. 4570, an omnibus bill that would affect Federal lands and reclamation
projects, includes many provisions that the Administration strongly
opposes because they would cause grave harm to the Nation's natural
resources.  These include provisions that would:

                Sanction uses within the San Rafael Swell wilderness in
Utah that would undermine wilderness values and management practices;
establish confusing and inappropriate layers of management; and limit the
Bureau of Land Management's ability to manage livestock.

                Undermine the President's authority under the
Antiquities Act to act quickly to protect significant natural, historical,
and scientific resources on Federal lands; and prohibit, under the
Antiquities Act, permanent designations of national monuments in excess of
50,000 acres without further congressional action.

                 Seek to accelerate timber harvesting on Federal lands
through inappropriate application of alternative arrangements for the
environmental review process under the National Environmental Policy Act
 (NEPA), while at the same time requiring the issuance of unnecessary,
bureaucratic regulations which can hamper flexibility in addressing
emergency situtations.

                Deny the public future access to lake-front lands around
Canyon Ferry Reservoir, Montana, by conveying these properties to
non-federal entities.

                Permit the sale and lease of valuable structures and
lands at Channel Island National Park, California, and C&O Canal National
Historic Park, Maryland, to private individuals.

                Exclude certain lands and roadways from the Cumberland
Island Wilderness, Georgia, thus undermining the ongoing collaborative
effort between the Federal Government, non-federal public entities, and
private individuals to prepare a wilderness management plan for both the
Cumberland Island National Seashore and the Cumberland Island Wilderness.

                Convey facilities and lands of eight Federal water
resources projects throughout the West (e.g. the Sly Park Unit of the
Central Valley Project, California) under terms and conditions that:  (1)
were not developed in an open and public manner; (2) lack sufficient
environmental protections; and (3) fail to consider the financial
interests of the American taxpayer.

                Allow an airport to be constructed near Mojave Preserve,
Nevada, without any c6nsideration of the possible harmful environmental
impact and effect.



                 Prohibit Federal rules or regulations that assert
jurisdiction, management, or control over certain navigable waters in the
State of Alaska.

                Grant an irrevocable and perpetual easemnet over
environmentally sensitive lands in the Chugach National Forest, Alaska, to
the Chugach Alaska Corporation, thereby overriding the provisions of the
19B2 Settlement Agreement with the Corporation's predecessor organization.

Notwithstanding the Administration's strong opposition to these and other
provisions of the bill, as listed in the Attachment, the Administration
has expressed support for some provisions that are now included in H.R.
4570. The Administration would fully.support enactment of those
particular bills, especially the legislation that would ratify an exchange
agreement between the Department of the Interior and the State of Utah, if
they are presented individually to the President.

Pay-As-You-Go Scoring

H.R. 4570 would affect direct spending; therefore, it is subject to the
pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) requirement of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
of 1990. OMB's PAYGO estimate for this bill is under development.

Attachment



The following provisions of H.R. 4570, in combination with the
aforementioned provisions, would also cause grave harm to the Nation's
resources and, thus, are objectionable to the Administration:

                   Wasatch-Cache National Forest and Mount Naomi
Wilderness, Utah
                  Conveyance to Clark County Department of Aviation, Nevada
                  Authorization of Use of National Forest Lands for Public
School Purposes
                 Conveyance of Camp Owen and Related Parcels, Kern
County, California
                         Addition of the Paoli Battlefield to the Valley
Forge National Historical Park, Pennsylvania
                 Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark, Arizona
                         Amendment of Land and Water Conservation Fund
Act of 1965 regarding Treatment of Receipts at Certain Parks
                         Amendments to the National Historic Preservation
Act (the Administration, however, supports the Senate-passed bill that
would reauthorize the National Historic Preservation Fund)
                 Hazardous Fuels Reduction
                 Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty Land Claims
                 Acquisition and Management of wilcox Ranch, Utah, for
wildlife Habitat
                         Operation and Maintenance of Existing Dams and
Weirs, Emigrant Wilderness, Stanislaus National Forest, California
                         Exemption for Not-for-Profit Entities from
Strict Liability for Recovery of Fire Suppression Costs
                 communication Site at San Bernardino National Forest,
California
                 Amendment of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act
                 Carlsbad Irrigation Project, New Mexico
                 Palmetto Bend Project, Texas


                    Minidoka Water Reclamation Resources Project, Idaho,
                    Wellton-Mohawk Division, Gila Project, Arizona
                    Colusa Basin Watershed Integrated Resources Management


*   *   *   *   *

(Do Not Distribute Outside the Executive Office of the President)

This Statement of Administration Policy (SAP) was prepared by LRD (Goad)
in consultation with NRD
(Cogswell/lrwin/Nolin/Reisner/Crutchfield/weatherly), BRD (Orlando/Kelly),
ESD (Starler), the Departments of Agriculture (Ancell), Army Corps of
Engineers-Civil Works (Bond), Energy (Samuls), the Interior (Gleason),
Justice (Taylor), and'Transportation (Herlihy), the Advisory Council on
History Preservation (Conway), the Council on Environmental Quality
(Lance), the Environmental Protection Agency (Dickerson), and the General
Services Administration (Ratchford).

The Resources Committee has neither held hearings nor ordered H.R. 4570
reported.  The Rules Committee may consider the bill on Thursday, October
1st. The House may take up the bill on Friday, October 2nd.

Administration position to Date

In a September 29, 1998,     letter to Chairman Young, the Secretary of the
Interior stated that, if     H.R. 4570 were presented to the President in its
current form, he and the     Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality
would recommend that the     President veto the bill.

Major Provisions of H.R. 4570

A title-by-title summary of H.R. 4570 is presented below. Those
provisions of the bill that form the basis of the Administration's
opposition are noted in greater detail.

                Title I -- Boundary Adjustments and Related Conveyances would affect
various National Park System and National Forest System lands. On the
whole, the Administration either supports or has no objection to these
provisions. The Administration, however, opposes the provision tbat would
convey at no cost Wasatch-Cache National Forest, Utah, lands to a private
landowner who is presently trespassing on those lands (H.R. 4320).

                 Title II -- Other Land Conveyances and Management would convey certa
other Federal 'lands, under the administrative control of the Departments of
Agriculture and the Interior. Of the provisions under this title, the
Administration opposes those that would:     (1) grant exclusive private use
of lake-front property around Canyon Ferry Reservoir, Montana, to
non-federal entities, thereby denying the public future use of these lands
(H.R. 3963, H.R. 4469, and S. 1913); (2) convey at less than market value
National Forest System lands to local education agencies (H.R. 2223); and
(3) mandate an exchange of Forest Service properties in Kern County,
California, for county lands without requiring either adequate analysis or
public involvement (H.R. 4023).

                Title III -- Heritage Areas would establish one new heritage area,      t
Automobile National Heritage Area of Michigan (H.R. 3910 and S. 2104), and
modify three exisiting areas:  (1) the Delaware and Lehigh National
Corridor of Pennsylvania (H.R. 2958 and S. 1665); (2) the Blackstone River


Valley National Heritage Corridor, Michigan (H.R. 3522); and (3)   the
Illinois and Michigan Canal National Heritage Corridor, Illinois   (H.R.
1042). The Department of the Interior previously cited concerns    with the
Delaware and Lehigh and Automobile National Heritage Areas, some   of which
have not been addressed in this bill.

                 Title IV -- Historic Areas would establish or enlarge historic sites
provide assistance in the administration and preservation of such sites,
and authorize site studies. The Administration opposes three provisions
that would:   (1) require the acquisition of lands of questionable historic
significance for the Valley Forge National Historical Park (H.R. 3746 and
S. 2401); (2) authorize the secretary of the Interior to provide
assistance to the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark in
springerville, Arizona (H.R. 60); and (3) authorize the sale or lease of
certain secondary structures and surplus lands administered as part of any
national historical park, as contrary to the mission of the National Park
Service (H.R. 4158). The Department of the Interior informally advises
that it objects to the creation of the Tuskegee Airmen National Historic
Site, as currently drafted, but understands an acceptable version will be
offered as a substitute.   The Department also informally advises that it
either supports or has no objection to the balance of the title.

                Title V -- San Rafael Swell, Utah would establish the San Rafael Swe
Heritage Area and the San Rafael Swell Conservation Area. The Department
strongly opposes the title's treatment of lands designated as wilderness
on the grounds that such treatment would depart significantly from the
letter and spirit of the 1964 Wilderness Act.   In addition to the
objections noted above, the bill would:   (1) grant virtually unlimited
motorized vehicular access within the designated wilderness; (2) release
the Sids Mountain Wilderness Study Area from interim wilderness
protection; and (3) significantly limit the Bureau of Land Management's
ability to manage livestock grazing within the Conservation Area.   At an
April 23rd House Resources Committee hearing on the stand alone bill, H.R.
3625, Interior threatened to recommend veto. Likewise, at a September
lOth Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee hearing on the Senate
companion, S. 2385, Interior also threatened to recommend veto.

                Title VI -- National Parks would authorize the expansion of various
National Park units or affect National Park Service management
activities. One of the ten provisions would amend the Antiquities Act to
make presidential proclamations of national monuments in excess of 50,000
acres effective for only two years, unless Congress approves such
proclamations by law. At a February 12th Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee hearing on the stand-alone bill, H.R. 1127, Interior
threatened to recommend veto because the bill would increase the
likelihood of irreparable harm to significant natural, historical, and
scientific resources on Federal lands by limiting the President's
authority to protect them or respond quickly to impending threats.   In
addition, Interior strongly opposes two other provisions of this title.
These provisions would:   (1) exclude certain lands and roadways from the
Cumberland Island Wilderness, Georgia, thus undermining the ongoing
collaborative effort between the Federal Government, non-Federal public
entities, and private individuals to prepare a wilderness management plan
for both the Cumberland Island National Seashore and the Cumberland Island
Wilderness (H.R. 4144); and (2) grant three individuals a right of
temporary use and occupancy of certain environmentally sensitive lands on
Santa Cruz Island, California (H.R. 2689).  Interior opposes another of
the title's provisions that would waive deed restrictions prohibiting
entrance fee collections at two parks and, thus, conflict with the
Administration's ongoing recreation fee demonstration program.



                Title VII -- Reauthorizations would reauthorize three advisory
councils and amend the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
Interior supports or has no objection to the reauthorization of the
councils and supports the NHPA amendment to reauthorize the Historic
Preservation Fund.  Interior, however, opposes the other NHPA amendments
that would make National Register eligibility determinations optional
rather than mandatory (as under current law), and restrict the Secretary's
authority to set professional requirement~ for State and tribal historic
preservation staff (H.R. 1522).

                Title VIII -- Rivers and Trails would establish national trails and
designate wild and scenic rivers.   Interior generally supports these
provisions, but has offered amendments to address certain deficiencies.
As for the provisions that would establish the National Discovery Trails
System, Interior opposes the requirement that, whenever a trail
designation is made within the System, the Department provide written
notification to all non-public landowners whose property the trail would
cross or abut.

                Title IX -- Hazardous Fuels Reduction would, under the guise of
safeguarding communities and property from catastrophic wildfires through
the elimination of hazardous fuels buildup, encourage commercial timber
harvest through use of credits. The U.S. Forest Service informally
advises that the Department objects to this provision.

                Title X -- Miscellaneous Provisions and Title XI---Amendments and
Technical Corrections to the 1996 Omnibus Parks Act contains 49 separate
items, including the following provisions that, as stand-alone bills, the
Administration opposed.

                        The "Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty Claims Act" (H.R.
2538), which would establish a presidential commission to determine the
validity of land claims arising out of the 1848 Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty.
The Administration opposes the provision because it would:   (1) renew land
title disputes; (2) create a process that provides no legal standards or
rules of evidence, no means for final resolution of these reopened claims,
and no judicial review; and (3) disrupt Federal land management activities.

                        The "Federal Land Policy and Management Act
Amendments" (H.R. 3187), which would exempt not-for-profit entities that
hold rights-of-way on public lands from certain strict liability
requirements imposed in connection with such rights-of-way.  The Depa
rtment of Agriculture opposed the bill as unnecessary in light of
available administrative remedies and because it would reduce the
Government's ability to recover any fire suppression costs.

                        The "Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act" (H.R.
3972), which would prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from charging
State and local government agencies for certain uses of the sand, gravel,
and shell resources of the Outer Continental Shelf.   Interior opposes the
elimination of the Secretary's authority to assess the fee.

        In addition, Title X includes the "East Texas Blowdown-NEPA
Parity" (H.R. 4345), which would accelerate timber harvesting on Federal
lands through the application of the Council on Environmental Quality's
expedited environmental review.  In a September 23rd letter on H.R. 4345,
the Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality advised Chairman Young
that she would recommend that the President veto the bill if presented to
him in its current form.



                Title XII -- Dutch John Federal Property Disposition and Assistance
would dispose of certain Federal reclamation water resources projects and
lands located in Dutch John, Utah. The'Department of the Interior
generally supports the provision.

                Title XIII' -- Reclamation Project Conveyances and Miscellaneous
Provisions would convey various Federal water reclamation resources
projects to local authorities throughout the western United States under
certain terms and conditions. Title XIII would not allow for meaningful
NEPA analysis prior to title transfer.   In addition, the title would
jeopardize the financial interests of the American taxpayer by not:    (1)
prohibiting the use of tax exempt financing, thus having the effect of
imposing costs for these transactions on the Treasury; and (2) considering
the full range of the asset values.   For various reasons, Interior opposes
the conveyance of:   (1) Sly Park Dam and Reservoir, California, to the El
Dorado Irrigation District, California; (2) Minidoka Water Reclamation
Resources Project, Idaho, to the Burley Irrigation District, Idaho; (3)
Carlsbad Irrigation Project, New Mexico, to the Carlsbad Irrigation
District, New Mexico; (4) Palmetto Bend Project, Texas, to the
Lavac-Navidad River Authority and the Texas Water Development Board, Texas.

        In addition to the concerns discussed above, Interior opposes the
following conveyances because the bill fails to reflect agreements
completed by the respective water districts and the Bureau of
Reclamation:   (1) Wellton-Mohawk Division of the Gila Project, Arizona, to
the Welton-Mohawk Irrigation and Drainage District, Arizona; (2)   Clear
Creek Distribution System, California, to the Clear Creek Community
Services District, California; (3) Vallecito Dam and Reservoir, Colorado,
to the Pine River Irrigation District, Colorado.

        The Department of the Interior opposes the cost sharing provisions
in the language that would authorize the construction of eligible water
resources reclamation projects in the Colusa Basin.

                Title XIV -- Provisions Specific to Alaska contains various provisio
related to land exchanges in the State of Alaska and technical amendments
to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act pertaining to land bank
protections.  Interior informally advises that it supports a proposed land
exchange to facilitate a hydro-power project near Glacier Bay National
Park, but the Administration took no position on the stand-alone bill
(H.R. 3903 and S. 2109) because of CEQ concerns with supporting a bill
that would affect existing wilderness areas.  Interior supports the other
provisions.

        The Department of Agriculture, in a February 25th statement before the
House Resources Committee, threatened to recommend veto on the stand-alone
bill (H.R. 3087) that would grant an irrevocable and perpetual easement
over environmentally sensitive lands in the Chugach National Forest to the
Chugach Alaska Corporation, thereby overriding the provisions of the 1982
Settlement Agreement with the Corporation's predecessor organization.
Title XIV incorporates this bill.

Pay-As-You-Go Scoring

According to BRD (Orlando, Kelly), H.R. 4570 would affect direct spending;
therefore it is subject to the pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) requirement of the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. OMB's PAYGO estimate for this
bill is under development.  There is no CBO scoring estimate available at
this time.




LEGISLATIVE REFERENCE DIVISION
October 1, 1998 - 4:35 P.M.


