RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-0CT-1998 15:39:46.00

SUBJECT:    USA Today Article on State TANF Spending

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI, here are Q&As HHS did on this morning's article (which I actually
hadn't seen since we didn't get clips).  It's more than we'd send to our
press office, but they basically look fine.  Cynthia, I've put copy of
article in your box.  Bruce/Elena -- if you want it, let me know.  While
it's great that states are doing innovative things with extra TANF funds,
these stories certainly don't help us, or them, on the Hill.

USA Today article on state spending


Q       What is the penalty mentioned in the USA Today article today and
how
does it work?

A       One of the provisions of the 1996 welfare reform law requires
states
to continue to spend state funds at a level equal to at least 80 percent of
their 1994 welfare spending.  States that meet the minimum work
participation rates can spend 75 percent.  President Clinton insisted on
this requirement as one of his conditions for signing the new welfare law
in order to avoid a "race to the bottom" by states in spending less for
families on welfare.  We have not seen a "race to the bottom" by states
last year.  In fact, states were spending more per recipient than in
previous years. And we continue to encourage states to make the
investments that will support parents to transition successfully from
welfare to work. The penalty for states which fail to maintain the
percentage of state spending in a year is a reduction in their federal
block grant for the next year of the amount spent less.   In other words, a
dollar for dollar reduction in their block grant.

Q          Did any states fail to meet the spending level?

A       We don't know as states have not reported yet with full fiscal
year
financial information. We do know that last year, all states met and many
exceeded the minimum spending levels.  In 1997, 22 states, or 43 percent,
reported state spending above the 80 percent. Five states spent 100
percent or more.


        Background note: We do not have the work participation rates yet
for
FY 1997. Some states spent at the 75 percent level anticipating that they
would meet the minimum work rates.  If a state fails to meet the work rate
that it could make it liable for a penalty.

Q       Are you concerned that states are not spending their funds?

A        The Clinton administration has strongly encouraged states to spend
more than the minimum maintenance of effort to invest in welfare-to-work
activities and supports that parents on welfare need to transition
successfully to work. We are very encouraged by state investments in child
care, transportation, refundable earned income'tax credits, and subsidized
employment.   we have not seen "a race to the bottom" by states so far.    In
fact, states are spending more per recipient than in previous years.    In
the recent report to Congress on the new welfare program, we did note that
more of. the caseload is becoming parents with greater barriers to
employment.   We continue to urge states to use all available resources
federal TANF funds, state dollars, Department of Labor welfare-to-work
grants -- to support those families with the opportunity for work and
self-sufficiency.

Q       When will you know if any states have not met the spending level?

A       States have until the end of December to file reports on their FY
1998 spending levels with HHS. We expect to compile a summary spending
report early next year.

Q       will you then impose any penalties?

A       For most penalties in the new welfare law, states have the option
to
submit corrective compliance plans.  However, the law excepts the state
maintenance of effort penalty from that option.  The Secretary would
fulfill the statute's requirement to reduce a state's block grant.

Q       Are you worried that states are keeping families on beyond the
time
limits? will that undercut the message of the law?

A       We believe that states are being tough with time limits.  Over 20
states have a limit that is shorter than the 5 years in the new welfare
law.  States are also very serious about work with strict time frames to
get jobs and stronger penalties for non-cooperation.  The state welfare
programs have combined strong work requirements with strict time limits to
encourage parents on welfare to play by the rules and add real urgency to
getting parents into jobs which is paying off. We've seen results in more
parents moving into jobs than under the old AFDC program.
     ARMS Email System
         ~.
                                                                                  Page 1 of 1


