  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-0CT-1998 14:50:33.00

  SUBJECT:   Approps riders

  TO: Elena Kagan
  READ: UNKNOWN

  CC: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN;Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Labor/HHS/Education

  1. National Testing: The House language effectively bans any additional
  work on test development; the Senate language permits pilot testing to
  proceed this year as planned. We should negotiate something close to the
  Senate position, perhaps with additional studies thrown in (as was done
  last year) to give Goodling something to claim credit for.  Barbara Chow,
  Broderick Johnson and I are meeting with Gooldling's staff this afternoon
  to explore their position.

  2.  Block Grants: The House bill includes language permiting states to
  shift funds from Goals 2000 to Title VI (an existing block grant). We
  must oppose this, with no negotiation. If kept,this provision would kill
  Goals 2000 and eliminate its emphasis on standards and accountability.   It
  will also be seen as a huge defeat for the Administration, because we lose
  Goals 2000 and cave on Block Grants.

  There is an even worse block grant bill Sen. Gorton is pushing, that would
  consolidate a large number of programs (Goals 2000, professional
  development, technology, etc.), end their purpose, and provide no
  accountablity.  It also contains a version of Ed-Flex (which allows states
  to waive federal requirements) which we should also oppose, because it is
  way too broad in its scope, and because there are no accountability
  provisions to go along with the added flexibility.

  If we need to negotiate in this area, our alternative should be
  thebipartisan Ed-Flex bill   (Frisy/Wyden in the Senate, Castle/Romer in
  the House) which we support because it incorporates the principles we
  articulated earlier this year when POTUS proposed Ed-Flex expansion to
  NGA.  NGA is also supporting this bill.

  3. Bilingual Education: This rider contains a 2-year limit on
  participation in bilingual education, with an absolute cut-off of
  participation after 4 years.  It also has provisions that strengthen
  accountability and expand flexibility in the existing bilingual ed
  program. 'Substantively, we must oppose with no negotiations the time
  limit and cutoff.  While we might be able to work out flexibility and
  accountability language to our substantive satisfaction, politically we
  will never work that out in this context to the satisfaction of the CHC.

  4.  D.C. School Reform. This rider prevents the Education Department from
  spending funds out of a discretionary account (FIE) for DC school reform.


  In light of the DC budget surplus, this    is not as big a concern as it once
                                                                                               1
  was (according to OMB) , and we can live   with the language.  I will
  double-check this with ED staff working    with DC schools and with the First
  Lady's office, to make sure we will not    be limiting our ability to take
  action in support of DC school reform.

  5.  IDEA Riggs Amendment.  We have and should continue to oppose this
  provision, which limits the ability of ED to enforce IDEA, with regard to
  providing educational serivces to disabled 18-21 year olds.

  THere is also a Livingston amendment on IDEA that may come up--it would
  allow school officials to remove indefinitely (as opposed to for 45 days
  and then going to a hearing officer) kids with disabilities who bring
  weapons or drugs to schools, or who engage in violent behavrion which
  could be harmful to other kids. We should oppose this flat out.    IF this
  doesn't work, we have developed with OMB and ED several fall back
  positions:   (1) codify the reg that ED will release soon, that will allow
  schools to repeat 45-day expulsions over and over as long as the hearing
  officer agrees; (2) propose an independent study (NAS or GAO) to evaluate
  implementation of new law, and determine if changes are needed; (3)
  propose sepcific wording changes to remove most objectionable provisions
  of Livingston amendment.

  I'm late for a national testing meeting on hill; I'll finish the last 2-3
  as soon as I get back.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 039 - FOLDER -001


[10/05/1998 - 1010611998]


