       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

       CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-0CT-1998 17:08:02.00

       SUBJECT:     gary black

       TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ:UNKNOWN

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Closing The Renegade Rift
                            Why RJR and B&W Came Back To The Table
                                     Outperforms MO, RN.



       Gary Black (212) 756-4197
       Jon Rooney (212) 756-4504

       October 6, 1998



       HIGHLIGHTS

          1.Sources indicate that RJR and B&W returned to the settlement talks
       after Philip Morris agreed to their
             demands that renegade credits be allocated on the basis of actual
       share lost, rather than average share as
             Philip Morris had proposed. Philip Morris apparently believes that
       renegade credits will never become an
             issue, given incentives that strongly encourage states to pass
       licensing fees, combined with an innovative
             proposal that should convince even the smallest manufacturers to
       embrace the deal.
          2.Specifically, would-be renegades are likely to be offered a carve-out
       that allows them to join the deal, and
             make no payments unless their share rises above 1998 levels. Share
       above the 1998 level would be subject
             to the same per pack payment as incurred by the majors. Renegades who
       don't sign up would be subject to
             state licensing fees on all share, rather than just marginal share.
          3.We now understand why it has taken so long for this deal to surface:
       The parties are trying to assemble a
             critical mass of 30-35 AGs in a position to embrace the deal when it
       is announced, to send a clear message
             to AGs who might be on the fence or hostile to the deal that the
       settlement offer is final, and that it would
             be futile to attack the deal as not strong or expensive enough. We
       believe the opt-in period will be
             relatively short (7-14 days); the longer the opt-in period, the more
       time open for criticism.
          4.Some on the AG side also believe it may be helpful to hold off
       announcing any deal until after Congress
             adjourns for the year -- likely this Friday, but could be delayed


until Monday, October 12. With prospects
      for the income tax cut (already passed by the House) now dead in the
Senate, any risk of an excise tax
      increase on cigarettes (to help fund the income tax cut) is also
dead.
   5.The terms of the deal are largely what we have outlined before:
$196.5 billion pro-rated for 46 states over 25
      years ($.35/pack price hike); includes $10 billion in up-front p
ayments, spread over 3-4 years; marketing
      restrictions similar to Minnesota (bans on billboards, branded
merchandise, product placements in movies,
      plus ban on most sponsorships; no FDA or lookback provisions) .
   6.The renegade multiplier is set at 3x (any share lost to
non-signatories would be multiplied by 3x and
      credited to the industry against the annual payments). Sources
suggest that renegade credits would only
      be "paid" by those states who do not pass licensing fee statutes
which effectively forces all states to
      adopt licensing plans or become one of a dwindling number of states
who would share the burden of the
      renegade credits. Any settlement payments would be credited toward
licensing payments.

INVESTMENT CONCLUSIONS

We reiterate outperform ratings on MO, RN, and UST. While we are pleased
that RN and B&W have returned to .
the settlement talks, most investors still likely need to see evidence
that substantially all states will sign up for the
deal before bidding up valuations further. Since we believe substantially
all of the remaining 46 states will embrace
this settlement within the opt-in period following announcement
 (Massachusetts, Wisconsin, Michigan, and
Maryland seem likely exceptions), we would continue to be buyers of all
tobacco stocks going into the deal
announcement. If, during the deal announcement, the lead AGs indicate that
35-40 states are already on board,
and if the opt-in period is only 7-14 days, we may never see the sell-off
we were anticipating last week at this time.
If, on the other hand, the announcement does not mention how many states
are on board, or if the opt-in period is
long (30-45 days), tobacco investors are likely to take some profits off
the table. We expect Philip Morris to
resume its $8 billion buyback in early November at the rate of $1 billion
per quarter. We expect UST to announce
the recapitalization of its balance sheet ($1 billion over 3 years)
also.in early-November. We continue to await
the Maryland Supreme Court ruling decertifying the Richardson class action
 (any day). A final catalyst may be
Election Day itself: If Republicans get a filibuster-proof majority of 60
seats in the Senate (now 55R, 45D; 1/3 seats
up for reelection), tobacco stocks are likely to move sharply higher as
investors anticipate tort reform.


