RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-0CT-1998 13:30:28.00

SUBJECT:   Testing strategy

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As Bruce and I discussed, when we negotiate the testing language, we
should make the following proposals:

1. Propose the Senate language, which prohibits us from field testing,
administering or implementing the test with FY 99 funds, but permits pilot
testing.

2. Propose a National Academy of Science Study to examine the feasibility
of including a subset of NAEP test items into state and commerical tests,
in order measure how well kids measure up to NAEP standards as well as
state or local standards without having to administer a separate national
test. (bill language for this option will be finalized shortly)

3. Propose a restriction on using FY99 funds for 6 months, for pilot
tests that would produce individual scores.

4. Propose a restriction on using FY99 funds for pilot tests that would
produce individual scores. This restriction would last for a full year,
and would end at the end of FY99 when the appropriations bill expired.

The language for 3 & 4 is below, though the more I think about it the less
option 3 makes sense to me.  If in the negotiations we explain that the
pilot tests NAGB is planning for April don't involve individual scores,
then they will probably think the 6 month ban on something that isn't
going to happen anyway is really silly.

5. Propose reducing the appropriations for test development from $16 to
$8 million. These funds have been requested in the Education Department's
Fund for the Improvement of Educatin (FIE) account.


Language for steps 3 and 4.

3. 6 month Restriction on pilot Test With Individual Scores
Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law,  no funds provided to
the Department of Education or to an applicable program in this Act or in
any other Act in fiscal year 1999 may be used prior to April I, 1999 for a
pilot test that would yield individual student, school, school district,
or state scores as part of the development of any federally sponsored
voluntary national test in reading, mathematics, or any other subject, or
to field test, implement or administer any such test; Provided, That the
National Assessment Governing Board shall retain exclusive authority over
 ·
the development of voluntary national tests as described in Section 307 of
the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 1998.

4. Restriction on pilot Test With Individual Scores
Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law,  no funds provided to
the Department of Education or to an applicable program in this Act or in
any other Act in fiscal year 1999 may be used for a pilot test that would
yield individual student, school, school district, or state scores as part
of the development of any federally sponsored voluntary national test in
reading, mathematics, or any other subject, or to field test, implement or
administer any such test;  Provided, That the National Assessment
Governing Board shall retain exclusive authority over the development of
voluntary national tests as described in Section 307 of the Department of
Education Appropriations Act, 1998.


