RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-0CT-1998 20:20:41.00

SUBJECT:   Education updates

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett    ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
1. Charters:   should come up for a vote in the Senate tonight and go to
the House tomorrow. No problems expected in the Senate; the only House
problem we are worried about is Goodling--his staff says he doesn't want
us to have any more bill signings, and may force this into the omnibus
bill. Hard to know whether to take his staff seriously.

2,  Literacy: Goodling's staff is telling ed. groups, as well as
Broderick Johnson and Scott Fleming, that they are holding the literacy
bill until they get what they want on the testing language. However,
Goodling himself denies this and has told Riley and the press that he has
a problem with a Judd Gregg provision that requires a set funding increase
for IDEA before the reading bill can be funded. He is talking about
changing the provision and sending this back to the Senate; a strategy
which on its face makes no sense, and lends some support to the idea that
he is diddling around with the bill until he gets what he wants on
testing.

I think Brod. should push back on Goodling's staff, and tell them that
linking literacy and testing, or trading one for the other, is simply
unacceptable to us.   Kennedy's staff, Brod. Johnson, and ED staff and I
think we should call Goodling's bluff, and that he will let the literacy
bill go. Kennedy is ready to go to the floor and to put out a press
release attacking Goodling for tying up the bipartisan bill, and for
blocking efforts to help kids learn to read by opposing higher standards
and tests and better teachers and tutors.

Elena--are you seeing anything in the omnibus negotiations that suggests
Goodling is making this linkage?

3. Voc-Ed bill.   Is reportedly coming to the floor in the House tonight,
and the Senate tomorrow.  No one has yet gotten their hands on the
conference report and knows in any detail what is in the bill--but the
Voc. Ed folks in ED are sure we like it.

4. Ed-Flex. Our preference remains to use Ed-Flex as a bargaining chip
in the negotiations over block grants. Our preferred Ed-Flex bill is one
sponsored by Castle and Roemer. Goodling is now also championing
Castle/Romer--but has deleted a provision that requires states to have a
Goals 2000 education reform plan in order to be eligible for Ed-Flex (this
provision is symbolically important to us, but we can live without it if
we can't get it back in the bill). Goodling is reportedly planning on
adding Ed-Flex to an Assistive Technology bill--perhaps in a move to take

·
    it out of play in the omnibus negotiations.  However, like much of what
    Goodling is up to, this move makes no sense, since the bill has already
    passed the Senate and would have to go back there if Ed-Flex is
    added--where it would most likely die (or get added to the omnibus) .

    The governors, who have been working with Castle, know nothing about
    Goodlings move. They think Ed-Flex is already in the Labor/HHS bill
    (though they don't know if that's the bill that was taken up on the floor
    of the House, or in the omnibus bill) .

    Given this confusion, right now I think we simply stick to our plan--use
    Ed-Flex as a bargaining chip.  If we get block grants out without using
    Ed-Flex, and if Castle/Goodling try to add it separately, we should fight
    to get our Goals 2000 provision back in, but not fallon our sword if we
    don't succeed. We can live with the provision as is, as long as we don'.t
    look to happy about it.


