RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP    [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-0CT-1998 17:27:33.00

SUBJECT:   Goals 2000 and Ed-Flex

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
After hearing Barbara's description of the Republican idea of paring down
the block grant proposal to specifying new ways in which Goals 2000 funds
could be'used, I think the Republican strategy may be shifting away from
advocating block grants and towards a new assault on Goals 2000, in order
to have something to take away from the table, I believe we should resist,
in a number of ways:

1. Oppose the idea of further specifying the purposes for which Goals $
can be used.  This seems inoccuous, especially since Goals funds are
designed to be flexible enough to be used for virtually any purpose
consistent with a school, district or state plan for education reform.
However, the last time we went down this road with the Republicans, we got
burned. In '95 we agreed to a provisions that "clarified" that schools
could bu computers with Goals 2000 funds; we agreed because it had no
practical effect-schools already could do that.  As a result, the
amendment sponsor (Ishtook) claimed that he gutted the program, and David
Broder wrote a column claiming that POTUS caved on his flagship program.

We shouldn't open ourselves to that again. If the R's want to enumerate
some of the uses of federal program funds, they should clarify how their
Title VI funds can be used.

2, Stiffen our resolve on the requirement that states have a Goals 2000
plan in order to participate in Ed-Flex. This is the provision that
Goodling removed from the Castle/Roemer Ed-Flex bill (with the agreement
of Castle, Roemer and the Dem. gov's.)  Our position has been to take
Ed-Flex as an alternative to block grants, and not fight too hard over the
G2k provision.   I now think we should dig in much harder, especially
since the R's appear to be already giving so much ground on their block
grant proposal. At this point, giving ground on the Goals 2000 provision
is a gift to the R's, and to the gov's--who need ed-flex much more than we
do, and who haven't done much to help us on the rest of our education
agenda.

The rationale for requiring a Goals 2000 plan in the first place is
sound--we will give added flexibility to a state only in the context of an
overall, cohesive approach to reforming education so kids can meet high
standards (and to accountability provisions that are not in dispute) .
Without such a plan, how could the state tell if a particular federal
requirement was in fact interfering with its own approach to education
reform?


Clearly we should still be use Ed-Flex if needed as an alternative to
block grants.   We should also be willing to take Ed-Flex if Castle/Roemer
want to push it on the omnibus bill--as long as it contains the Goals
provision.

Hope this makes sense to you; track me down if you need anything.


