RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-0CT-1998 01:26:55.00

SUBJECT:     national test language/options

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is my best cut at language that reflects our conversations after the
Goodling meeting.  I've basically created 4 sets of areas in which we
could possibly make consessions:

1. Restrictions on pilot Testing    This set is where we would love to end
up.  It includes a new provision that explicitly bans pilot tests that
permit comparisons among districts.   The others are options we previously
developed, to restrict pilot testing or both pilot and field tests that
provide individual scores.

2. Restrictions on Implementation This set includes big concessions, in
two ways. The first agrees that we need specific authorization before
implementation, and tells NAGB to develop an implementation plan in time
for NAEP/NAGB reauthorization.

The second approach prohibits states or districts from participating in
the tests unless the file a certification with the Secretary that they are
addressing the quality issues Goodling keeps raising.  I've tried to draft
this with some flexibility, so that the states and cities that have
already signed up could plausibly meet this requirement.  This would be
the first time we have agreed to attach any "string" to the· test.

I will ask ED for some drafting assistance on these two first thing in the
am.

3. National Academy Studies. A new study on teacher quality for
Goodling, and the old one on embedding NAEP items for his staff.

4. Budget Cuts. We can live with half of what we requested--though we
will need more than $8 million if we are going to pay for the NAS studies.

I am trying to get a better handle on study costs; to be safe I'd save $1
million for each.



I.         RESTRICTIONS ON PILOT TESTING

1. Senate Language with ban on comparisons among districts.
Sec. 305.    Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law, funds
provided to the Department of Education or to an applicable program may
not be used to field test, implement or administer any federally sponsored


national test in reading, mathematics, or any other subject, nor may any
funds be used to conduct pilot tests that allow for comparisons of test
results among school districts: Provided, That the National Assessment
Governing Board shall retain exclusive authority over the development of
voluntary national tests as described in Section 307 of the Department of
Education Appropriations Act, 1998.


2. Restriction on pilot Test With Individual Scores
Sec.      Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law,  no funds
provided to the Department of Education or to an applicable program in
this Act or in any other Act in fiscal year 1999 may be used for a pilot
test that would yield individual student, school, school district, or
state scores as part of the development of any federally sponsored
voluntary national test in reading, mathematics, or any other subject, or
to field test, implement or administer any such test;  Provided, That the
National Assessment Governing Board shall retain exclusive authority over
the development of voluntary national tests as described in Section 307 of
the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 1998.

3. Restriction on pilot Test and Field Test With Individual Scores
Sec.      Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law, no funds
provided to the Department of Education or to an applicable program in
this Act or in any other Act in fiscal year 1999 may be used for a pilot
test or field test that would yield individual student, school, school
district, or state scores as part of the development of any federally
sponsored voluntary national test in reading, mathematics, or any other
subject, or to implement or administer any such test; Provided, That the
National Assessment Governing Board shall retain exclusive authority over
the development of voluntary national tests as described in Section 307 of
the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 1998.


II.       RESTRICTIONS ON IMPLEMENTATION

4. No Implementation Without Authorization & NAGB Develops plan for Test
Implementation and Use
Sec.        Notwithstanding any other provisions of Federal law, funds
provided to the Department of Education or to an applicable program may
not be used to implement or administer any federally sponsored national
test in reading, mathematics or any other subject that is not specifically
and explicitly provided for in authorizing legislation enacted into law.
The National Assessment Governing Board shall develop a plan for the
continued development and implementation of national tests that measure
individual student performance against National Assessment of Educational
Progress standards in 4th grade reading and 8th grade mathematics.     The
plan shall include policies for the administration and use of national
tests.  In developing this plan, NAGB shall consider the feasibility of
including items from the National Assessment of Educational Progress or
other tests in state and district assessments to provide a measure of
individual student performance against National Assessment of Educational
Progress standards in 4th grade reading and 8th grade mathematics.     NAGB
shall present a written plan to the Committee on Education and Workforce
of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Labor and Human
Resources of the Senate, and the President for their consideration by
_____ (prior to reauthorization of the National Assessment of Education
progress) .


5.    No State or Local Implementation Without Quality Assurance
.   "




    No state or local school district may participate in national tests unless
    it provides an assurance to the Secretary of Education that it has
    developed and is implementing a plan to (1) ensure that teachers have the
    knowledge and skills necessary to teach students to meet the NAEP
    standards; (2) provide all students with access to a challenging
    curriculum that can prepare them to meet the NAEP standards, (3) provide
    additional assistance to students and schools that do not make progress
    toward meeting the NAEP standards.


        III.   NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES STUDIES

    6. NAS Study on Embedding NAEP Items in State and Local Tests
    The National Academy of Sciences shall conduct a study of the technical
    feasibility of including items from the National Assessment of Educational
    Progress or other tests in state and district assessments to provide a
    measure of individual student performance against National Assessment of
    Educational Progress standards in 4th grade reading and 8th grade
    mathematics and the quality of the information about a student's
    performance that would be provided to parents and teachers. The National
    Academy of Sciences shall report the results of the study to Congress by
    June 1, 1999.


    7. NAS Study on Teacher Quality
    The National Academy of Sciences shall conduct a study to identify the
    knowledge and skills teachers must have in order to effectively prepare
    students to meet national standards, and to identify the most effective
    approaches to teacher preparation and professional development to ensure
    that teachers possess the requisite knowledge and skills. The National
    Academy of Sciences shall report the results of the study to Congress
    by_ __

        IV.    BUDGET CUT

        6. Propose reducing the appropriations for test development from $16 to
        $8 million. These funds have been requested in the Education Department's
        Fund for the Improvement of Education (FIE) account.

    Note that we will need more than $8 million if we are to conduct the NAS
    studies (I donD,t know the cost of these studies yet, but I would save $1
    million each to be on the very safe side.
.
