RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-0CT-1998 13:41:02.00

SUBJECT:   Erskine memo--draft II

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
MEMORANDUM FOR ERSKINE BOWLES

FROM:             Bruce Reed

SUBJECT:                  Negotions on National Testing

Mr. GoodlingD,s staff indicated to Mike Cohen that the language we
offered on national tests yesterday is unacceptable to them.  They further
indicated that they were unwilling to permit pilot testing to occur, and
that they doubted that the President would veto the omnibus bill over this
issue. GoodlingD,s staff

Our offer would have permitted NAGB to conduct pilot testing as planned,
but also clarified that the type of testing Mr. Goodling indicated was of
greatest concern to him--tests that would enable comparisons among school
districts to be made--would not be allowable this year.

As a follow-up to this discussion, Elena spoke with Mr. ArmeyD,s staff,
indicating that we still hoped to work out an agreement that gave us what
we needed while still giving Mr. Goodling plenty to claim victory over.
While not responding substantively, she displayed a more open posture.

In order for us to make satisfactory progress on this issue, we need you
to send a clear signal to the Republican negotiators that, while we are
prepared to give considerable ground to Mr. Goodling, NAGB must be able to
proceed with pilot testing as planned in order for this issue to be
resolved to our satisfaction.

Attached are our fallback options for further negotiations.       Each of them
permits pilot testing to occur as planned

Fallback 1
This is the Senate language, with additional language that prohibits any
testing this year that would enable comparisons among school districts.
It also includes an additional NAS study that would examine the
feasibility of including test items from NAEP into state or local tests,
to determine if it will be possible for a state or school district to use
its own test instead of the nationa test.

Fallback 2
This option to be offered in addition to Fallback 1, would require a state
or school district to certify to NAGB that is has a plan in place to have
qualified teachers, an appropriate curriculum, and extra help for students
and schools, before it can give the tests.  This responds to Mr.
GoodlingD,s concerns that the test shouldnD,t be give until the D&quality


    is put inD8.   It is also likely to appeal to the CBC.

    Fallback 3
    This option is as far as we can go.  It would permit pilot testing as
    planned, but would not permit test implementation to occur unless
    specifically authorized by Congress. This would be a major concession to
    Goodling--and would force us to have an uphill authorization fight in the
    next year.


