RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Pauline M. Abernathy ( CN=Pauline M. Abernathy/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 23-FEB-1997 21:18:40.00

SUBJECT:   Action/event ideas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I apologize for not getting back to you last week on action ideas.   I was
staff contact for events on Friday, Weds., and Friday for HRC and/or the
POTUS.  I'm not sure what form people gave you ideas, so I will just
briefly list some and I can put them into your format if someone
circulates it to me.

DC: Bruce said DPC ought to get more active on education and crime in
DC. Regarding education, Becton has not been as aggressive as Mayor Daley
in Chicago and does not seem to have surrounded himself with the kind of
people Daley has and he needs to.   Melanne and I have discussed the idea
of helping Becton create a small high-level advisory committee for him
made up of the real stars in the field.   This approach would enable us to
do more while addressing the Dept. 's concerns about getting too involved
in local education reform.  I was planning to discuss the idea with Mike
C, OMB, and the Dept. unless you recommend otherwise.

Regarding DC events, the FLOTUS has now done events on microenterprise,
challenging law firms to partner with schools, and on colleges partnering
with schools and pledging reading tutors.  I worked with Ann Lewis, Steve
Silverman, and Carol Thompson-Cole on the memo to the President on
coordinating DC events, but did not yet hear whether Thursday night's
meeting with the President on DC responded to that memo.  The memo both
described a process for coordinating events, and listed some of the ideas
I have been kicking around for a while, such as White House involvement in
DC net days, a big cleanup effort on Earth Day, and highlighting agency
efforts, including NASA's involvement in the schools and GSA's donation of
computers.

DC School Construction Event: Next Thursday 2/27 we expect the
privatization of Connie Lee to be completed, making it possible for us to
do a high profile event with Rubin and one of the White House principals
announcing that we are making millions of dollars available for school co
nstruction and repair in DC -- more than would be available for DC under
our national school construction proposal.  Treasury will be submitting an
event proposal to the White House.

DC Economic Development:  The POTUS is scheduled to announce the specifics
of his DC economic development proposal on Friday March 7.

DC summer jobs: We could help ensure there are jobs available for DC
teens this summer in at least two ways:  by convening DC employers and
challenging them to do more and by continuing and expanding the federal
agencies' summer jobs and internship programs.   Last summer the federal
government hired hundreds of DC youth.  The Treasury Dept. has powerful
letters from students who interned there over the summer. One DC public
school student said the internship was her first experience in the work
world, taught her how to use a computer, and allowed her to visit the
White House for the first time -- after having lived in DC for 18 years!



Pediatric Drug Labeling: Elizabeth Drye, Patsy, OVP, and I have held some
meetings with FDA and outside groups on the lack of pediatric safety and
dosing information on many drugs with pediatric applications.   FDA has
made it relatively easy for drug companies to provide this data, but still
most do not do it, leaving it up to doctors to decide whether to prescribe
the drug for children and in what doses.   This issue has become very hot
now for two reasons:  it is now clear that the actions Kessler took to
encourage companies to submit this data have not worked, and many doctors
are afraid to prescribe the highly effective anti-HIV protease inhibitors
to children without better information because the drugs are so toxic.
Further Administration action on ·this issue could generate industry
opposition, but would likely earn broad public support and attention.
There seem to be several views witgin the Administration on how best to
proceed on this issue, and I believe it is ripe for DPC to step in and
develop a consensus.  Elizabeth and I would be happy to brief you on this
issue.

Child Care:  I do not have a specific initiative in mind, but as you and
Bruce have stated before, we need to take some actions on child care,
perhaps on quality/safety.  I would think we need to ask HHS, DOL and
others to give us some proposals. Were you planning on doing this as part
of our 0-3 working group?

0-3:   List of possible actions being developed.

Education:   I won't attempt this without seeing what Mike has already
given you. As I mentioned before, we could do a great POTUS or FLOTUS
event on the release of a new Education Dept. manual on how to establish a
community school, similar to the manual on school uniforms.   It is very
well done arid ready to go.  Rahm had initially scheduled a POTUS event to
release the manual, but it fell through and I don't believe it has been
rescheduled.

Family Medical Leave: Rahm and Gene have a list of reports on the FMLA
that DOL is preparing an which could be the subject of future events.  I
can get a copy of the latest to you if you are interested and do not
already have it. While recent discussions have focused on linkage with
flex-time, I think there are some additional expansion proposals that the
Administration might entertain and would be much less controversial than
lowering the firm-size threshold to 25 employees -- such as making time I
know Gene will be assigning someone from the NEC to be working on family
and work issues, but am unclear how active you expect DPC to be.

I hope this is helpful.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 004 - FOLDER -004


[02/24/1997]
