RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-0CT-1998 15:11:09.00

SUBJECT:     Today's NYT on Food

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

ce: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The NYT today ran this story applauding our success in using HACCP to
reduce salmonella.

            EATING WELL

             Success for New U.S. Standards on Meat
             and Poultry

             By MARIAN BURROS

                he federal government's new system for reducing
contamination in
                meat and poultry appears to be having positive results. Two
weeks
           ago, the Agriculture Department announced that the system has
almost cut
           in half the number of broiler chickens contaminated with
salmonella in the
           plants where it is in use. It has also greatly reduced the
amount of
           salmonella-infected pork.

             The system, called Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points,
and also
             known as Haacp (pronounced HASS-ip), became mandatory in January
             at the largest meat and poultry processing plants (like Perdue's
and
             Tyson's). By the year 2000, the standards will include smaller
plants as
             well. Under Haacp, plants must identify critical points in the
production
             process where contamination is likely to occur and implement
plans to
            prevent the contamination.

          The system, with its routine testing for various bacteria, marks
the first time
          the federal government has set microbial standards and required
industry


             and government testing on such a large scale.

             It is a definite step up from the old sniff-and-poke method.

          There are many ways for producers to reduce the levels of
contamination
          to meet the system's standards. scientific study has increased
in the wake
          of highly publicized outbreaks of food-borne illness as well as
huge and
          costly recalls of tainted food, especially ground beef.

          Critics charge that the meat and poultry industries resisted
change. It was
          easier -- and cheaper -- to tell consumers it was their fault if
they got sick
          from eating tainted beef or chicken because they had mishandled
it. The
          industry realized that sales of its products were affected by
these incidents.
          More or less.

             Some of the ideas for safer food are so simple you wonder why no
one
             ever thought of them before. More humane handling of cattle, for
example,
             reduces stress and thereby reduces shedding of deadly E. coli
0157:H7.
          When the cattle are stressed, the E. coli are released from
their intestinal
          tract and are excreted in their manure.

          And just last month, scientists at Cornell University discovered
that if cattle
          were switched from a diet of grain to a diet of hay or fresh
grass for five
          days before slaughter, E. coli 0157:H7 is virtually eliminated.

             No one is suggesting that any of the new technologies will
completely
             eliminate the hazards associated with eating raw or minimally
processed
             foods. And in fact, recalls of contaminated food do not appear
to have
             fallen. Late last month, about two million pounds of meat and
poultry
             headed for institutional use were recalled because of salmonella
             contamination at a Georgia processing plant.

             But the new ideas can reduce the level of risk. Some of them,
like
             inoculating animals with "good" bacteria to crowd out the
dangerous
             bacteria, have already won federal approval; others are still in
the
            development stage.

          Some of New York City's best-known chickens are already
participating
          in a new technology called competitive exclusion. One-quarter of
'.
     Bell &
                 Evans chickens are being sprayed with Preempt, a mixture of
     friendly
                 bacteria that prevent harmful bacteria like salmonella from ever
     taking
                 hold. The spray, produced by MS Bioscience Inc. in Madison,
     Wis., has
                 been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. The president
     of
                 Bell & Evans, Scott Sechler, says that eventually, all the
     company's
                 chickens will be treated with Preempt.

                 The president of MS Bioscience, Dr. John DeLoach, says the
     chickens
                 are sprayed in the hatchery and within two days they have a
     lifetime
                 protection against salmonella.

                 But the spray is only part of the MS Bioscience regimen: there
     must also
                 be clean litter for the chickens, and neither antibiotics nor
     growth
                 promoters can be used. DeLoach admits he is not sure what part is
                 responsible for the success.

                Sechler said: "We are very happy with the results so far. For
     the most part
                we found completely negative tests with a very small amount of
     positives.
                The percentages amazed us."

               possible future treatments include the work of Dr. Michael
     Doyle, who is
               the director of the Center for Food Safety and Quality
     Enhancement at the
               University of Georgia. Doyle is experimenting with another form
     of
               competitive exclusion, giving young calves an oral dose of
     friendly E. coli
               bacteria to prevent the growth of E. coli 0157:H7. But
     sufficient tests for
               FDA approval are at least two years away, Doyle said.

               scientists have been working on the egg front as well.
     Pasteurized Eggs
               LP of Laconia, N.H., has patented a technique for pasteurizing
     eggs in
               their shells. The eggs would carry an Agriculture Department
     shield that
               certifies them as pasteurized and 99.999 percent salmonella
     free. The
               company says that the pasteurized eggs will retain their
     characteristic taste,
               appearance and cooking characteristics. Welcome back sunny side
     up
               and real Caesar salad.

               Shady Brook Farms has been using trisodium phosphate, an
     anti-bacterial
0'

               rinse, on its turkey carcasses for several years, and according
     to the
               company it virtually eliminates such disease causing bacteria as
     E. coli
               0157:H7, salmonella and listeria.

               But elimination of all bacteria from food is neither feasible
     nor desirable.
               There is such a thing as "too pristine," James Jay, a
     microbiologist at the
               University of Nevada at Las Vegas, said. Getting rid of all
     bacteria on a
               carcass leaves the meat with no protection if it is
     recontaminated, he
               added.

               No matter what improvements are made to reduce the levels of
     harmful
               bacteria in the food supply, everyone still needs to be careful
     at home and
               follow the recommendations for safe handling.


