 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:15-0CT-1998 11:46:59.00

 SUBJECT:   NEAR-FINAL DRAFT of Victory Document

 TO: Charles R. Marr ( CN=Charles R. Marr/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Lael Brainard ( CN=Lael Brainard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD    1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elliot J. Diringer ( CN=Elliot J. Diringer/OU=CEQ/O=EOP @ EOP [ CEQ   1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: David W. Beier ( CN=David W. Beier/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Jonathan Weiss    ( CN=Jonathan Weiss/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO       1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas A. Kalil    ( CN=Thomas A. Kalil/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jake Siewert ( CN=Jake Siewert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan A. Kaplan ( CN=Jonathan A. Kaplan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sharon H. Yuan ( CN=Sharon H. Yuan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Shannpn Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )


READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Eric R. Anderson ( CN=Eric R. Anderson/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Eli G. Attie ( CN=Eli G. Attie/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]    )
READ : UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ : UNKNOWN

TO: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah Rosen ( CN=Sarah Rosen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Just wanted to provide everyone another chance to comment/add/subtract on
this long budget victory document and the shorter "work left to do"
document.   (OMB is reviewing it right now to make sure the numbers are
correct.)  If you have suggestions, I need them by 1:15 PM. And that's a
hard deadline. Thanks.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D9]MAIL471204885.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750438A1B0000010A02010000000205000000FBEC00000002000083127510B4A4D502912910
41A6F9259C087425243AE039B211F75A6AF77805605FC8FD6B7C741019302363CC0882BF671760
39344EEBFE93E4993585BB1EB6AC1959CEE35A3FCOF795CADAEA7B1CA17AD4887D8B62A72D2E48
        CONGRESSIONAL DEMOCRATS WIN ON THE BUDGET
                                         October 15, 1998


Saving Social Security First
In his State of the Union address, President Clinton asked a basic question "what should we do with
this projected surplus," and gave an historic four-word answer: "Save Social Security First." With
our fiscal house in order, marked by the first surplus in a generation, President Clinton is determined
to seize this unique opportunity to strengthen this most important program for generations to come.
Protecting the surplus is a key step towards enacting Social Security reform. President Clinton
defeated repeated efforts to squander the surplus and, at the end of this Congress, it remains intact.

Invests in Education and Training
In the face of House Republican efforts to slash their education budget by more than $2 billion,
President Clinton and Vice President Gore delivered on their education agenda:

NEW EDUCATION AND TRAINING INITIATIYES IN FINAL BIJDGET AGREEMENT:

       More High-Quality Teachers With Smaller Class Sizes. In his State ofthe Union address,
       President Clinton said, "Tonight, I propose the first-ever national effort to reduce class size in
       the early grades. My balanced budget will help to hire 100,000 new teachers." Throughout
       the year, Republicans failed to consider this important initiative. The final budget provides
       $1.2 billion for the first year ofthe President's new initiative to hire 100,000 new,
       well-prepareq teachers, to reduce class sizes in the early grades to a national average of 18.

       GEAR-UP: College Mentoring Initiative To Help Up to 100,000 Students Prepare for
       College. In his State of the Union address, President Clinton urged Congress "to support
       our efforts to enlist colleges and universities to reach out to disadvantaged children, starting
       in the 6th grade, so that they can get the guidance and hope they need so they can know that
       they, too, will be able to go on to college." The President proposed $140 million to get this
       effort started, but the House appropriations bill denied funding and the Senate provided only
       $75 million. The final budget provides $121 million for this new initiative which was
       authorized as part of the higher education legislation enacted on October 7th. GEAR-UP
       will expand mentoring efforts by States, and provide new grants to partnerships of middle
       schools, institutions of higher education, and community organizations, to provide
       intensive early intervention services to help prepare up to 100,000 students at
       high-poverty middle schools for college.

       Child Literacy Initiative to Help Children Read Well By the End of the Third Grade.
       In 1996, President Clinton proposed an America Reads Challenge to help 3 million
       children improve their reading skills. In 1997, he insisted that the new initiative be
       included as part of the Balanced Budget Agreement. With this budget, he has won the
       $260 million that he proposed to help ensure that all children can read well and
       independently by the end of third grade. The budget includes the legislation creating
       a program that is consistent with the President's America Reads proposal. The new
       program will provide competitive grants to States to (1) improve teachers' ability to
       teach reading effectively; (2) promote family literacy programs to help parents be their
       child's first teacher; and (3) improve the quality of tutoring programs by supporting
       tutor training.                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
     High-Poverty Communities. As part of the Workforce Investment Bill, President Clinton
     created Youth Opportunity Grants to direct resources to high-poverty areas, including
     Empowennent Zones and Enterprise Communities, to provide comprehensive services
     designed to increase employment and school completion rates for disadvantaged youth. The
     President's FY99 budget included $250 million for this new innovative program. While the
     House Republican budget did not fund this critical initiative, the final agreement includes the
     full $250 million request, which will help provide job training and social services to 50,000
     youth.

     New Learning Anytime, Anywhere Initiative. The President's FY99 budget included a
     new initiative to enhance and promote distance learning opportunities -- learning outside the
     usual classroom settings, via computers and other technology -- for all adult learners. The
     final budget includes $20 million for the Education and Labor Departments to implement this
     new initiative to demonstrate new high-quality uses oftechnology for distance leaming in
     post-secondary education and training, and to help provide more accurate labor market
     infonnation.

     Teacher Recruitment and Preparation -- $75 million. On October 7th, President Clinton
     signed legislation that had incorporated the President's Teacher Recruitment and Preparation
     proposal. While House Republicans did not fund this important initiative, the final budget
     provides $75 million, which will help recruit and prepare thousands of teachers to teach in
     high-poverty urban and rural communities and will strengthen teacher preparation programs
     across the country.

     Training New Teachers to Use Technology Effectively. President Clinton's FY99 budget
     requested $75 million to train new teachers in how to use technology to improve student
     achievement. The House and Senate Republicans denied the request. The final agreement
     includes the full $75 million the President requested.

     Hispanic Education Action Plan To Attack Unacceptably High Drop-Out Rate.
     Because the high-school drop-out rate of Hispanics is unacceptably high, President
     Clinton's FY99 budget included the first-ever Hispanic Education Action Plan. As
     part of this plan, the President proposed significant increases in Title I funding and a
     number of other programs that enhance educational opportunity for Hispanic
     Americans. The final budget includes increases of $524 million for these programs;
     for example, it provides a $301 million increase for Title I; $600 million for TRIO
     college preparation programs, an increase of $70 million over FY 1998, which will
     provide support services for over 700,000 students; and $50 million for Bilingual
     Education Professional Development -- double the FY 1998 level -- to begin to provide
     20,000 teachers over five years with the training they need to teach Limited English
     Proficient students.

EXPANDED KEY EDUCATION AND TRAINING INVESTMENTS;

     Expanded After-School Programs To Serve A Quarter of A Million Children. In his
     State of the Union address, President Clinton asked Congress to "dramatically expand our
     support for after-school programs." The President and Vice President proposed $200 million
     for after-school programs in their FY99 budget. While the House Republican budget did not

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                2
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
services to about 425,000 children, the final budget includes full funding for the President's
and Vice President's initiative, which will serve a quarter of a million children each year.

Expanded Head Start. President Clinton proposed a $313 million increase for Head Start
to add 30,000 to 36,000 new slots for children, continuing on the path to serving one million
children by 2002. The House Republican budget did not provide the President's increase
and would have denied 25,000 children Head Start slots if enacted. The final budget
includes the President's full increase for Head Start, which is funded at $4.660 billion.

Summer Jobs Protected for Half a Million Youth. While House Republicans attempted to
eliminate the successful Summer Jobs program, President Clinton prevailed with his request
for $871 million in funding, which will finance up to 530,000 summer jobs for disadvantaged
youth.

Expanded Educational Technology -- Connecting Our Children to the Future.
President Clinton's and Vice President Gore's budget requested $721 million -- a $137
million increase -- for educational technology to ensure that every child has access to
computers, the Internet, high-quality educational software, and teachers that can use
technology effectively in the classroom. The House Republican denied the President's and
Vice President's request for a funding increase, cutting funding $43 million below last year.
The final agreement includes $729 million -- a 25-percent increase over the $584 million
funding level in FY98, including the new $75 million initiative for training new teachers and
$10 million for new grants to public-private partnerships in low-income communities to
provide residents access to computer facilities for educational and employment purposes.
Education technology has always been a top priority for the President and Vice President;
since 1993, they have created the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund and increased overall
investments in educational technology by more than thirty-fold, from $23 million to $729
million this year.

Expanded Goals 2000 to Promote High Academic Standards. President Clinton created
Goals 2000 in 1993 to promote high academic standards for all students and proposed a
modest expansion in this year's budget. While the House Republican budget tried to cut the
program in half, the final budget includes $491 million which will help all 50 States continue
raise academic standards and help at least 12,000 schools implement innovative and effective
education reforms.

Improved Child Care Quality. In his State ofthe Union, the President proposed an
historic child care initiative to make child care better, safer and more affordable for
America's working families. While the budget does not include critical investments in
subsidies and tax credits to help working families pay for child care, it does include the
President's request of $182 million to improve the quality of child care.

Expanded Work Study To Help Nearly One Million Students Work Their Way
Through College. President Clinton's FY99 budget included a significant expansion of the
Federal Work Study program. The final budget agreement provides $870 million -- a $40
million increase over the FY 1998 level of $830 million -- which will allow nearly one
million students to work their way through college and keeps us on track to the President's
goal of one million students in work study by the year 2000.

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                            3
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
       FY99 budget included a significant expansion in the dislocated worker program. While the
       House froze job training funds for dislocated workers, the final agreement includes $1.4
       billion which will help some 666,000 dislocated workers get the training and reemployment
       services they need to return to work as quickly as possible. This represents an increase of
       $55 million -- to help 27,000 dislocated workers -- compared to FY98. Since 1993,
       dislocated worker funding has been expanded by 171 percent -- helping to well more than
       double the number of workers served.

       Expanded Charter Schools to Promote Creation High-Quality Public Schools.
       President Clinton's FY99 budget included $100 million for Charter Schools to keep us on
       track toward the President's goal of creating 3,000 high-quality public charter schools that
       will educate more than half a million students by early in the next century. Charter schools
       are public schools started by teachers, parents and communities, that are given flexibility in
       decision-making, in exchange for high levels of accountability for results. The final budget
       provides $100 million -- the President's 25-percent increase -- for Charter Schools and will
       give parents and students more choice, better schools, and greater accountability for results in
       public education.

       Assistance to Help Over 400,000 More Students in Distressed Communities Learn Basic
       Skills. President Clinton proposed a $392 million increase in Title I funding to help
       students in high poverty communities receive the extra help they need to master the basics to
       reach high academic standards. The House Republican budget proposed a freeze in Title I
       funding. The final budget provides a $301 million increase, from $7.375 billion in FY98 to
       $7.676 billion in FY99. This funding will support educational services for nearly 11 million
       students, over 400,000 more than last year.

       Largest Maximum Pell Grant Award Ever. Last year, President Clinton signed into law
       the largest one-year increase in Pell Grant scholarships in 20 years. This year, the final
       budget provides $7.7 billion for Pell Grants, an increase of$359 million over FY98,
       increasing the maximum Pell Grant award from $3,000 to $3,125 -- that's the largest
       maximum award ever, 36-percent higher than it was in 1993. This year, approximately 4
       million students will receive Pell Grant awards.

Moves Forward On The Environment
In the final budget, President Clinton won important increases to combat water pollution, protect
national parks and other precious lands, restore salmon and other endangered species, and develop
clean energy technologies. At the same time, President Clinton forced Congress to drop
special-interest riders that would have cut roads through wilderness, forced overcutting on our
national forests, crippled wildlife protections, and blocked common-sense actions to address global
warming.

       Clean, Safe Water for America. The final budget provides $1.7 billion -- an additional
       $230 million or 16-percent increase from last year -- for the President's Clean Water Action
       Plan, a five-year initiative to help communities and farmers clean up the almost 40 percent of
       America's surveyed waterways still too polluted for fishing and swimming. In addition, the
       budget provides states $2.15 billion in financing for clean water construction projects.
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   4
     year -- through the Land and Water Conservation Fund will be used to acquire dozens of
     natural and historic sites around the country, including critical winter range for Yellowstone
     bison, New Mexico's Baca Ranch and the last remaining private stretches of the Appalachian
     Trail.

     Protecting Endangered Species. The final budget provides a 23-percent increase for
     efforts to restore threatened and endangered species, including $5 million to provide
     incentives for habitat conservation on private lands.

     Leading the Fight Against Global Warming. The final budget provides over $1 billion--
     a 24-percent increase from last year -- to support research investments that will reduce
     greenhouse gas emissions, oil consumption, and energy costs for consumers and businesses
     by promoting increased energy efficiency and clean energy technologies.

     Defending Our Environment Against Stealth Attacks. President Clinton forced
     Congress to drop special-interest riders that would have rolled back hard-won environmental
     protections. Anti-environmental language in the budget bills would have:

            Forced overcutting oftimber on national forests and accelerated logging of Alaskan
            rain forest.

            Allowed intrusive helicopter landings in Alaska wilderness and the first road ever
            carved through a designated wilderness area.

            Hindered salmon restoration in the Pacific Northwest, and allowed harmful
            commercial fishing in wilderness waters of Glacier Bay National Park.

            Blocked common-sense actions to reduce greenhouse gas pollution, and barred the
            Administration from informing the public about the threat of global warming.

Responds to the Farm Crisis at Home...
     Emergency Farm Assistance. President Clinton vetoed the Agriculture Appropriations bill
     on October 8th "because it fails to address adequately the crisis now gripping our Nation's
     farm community." The final budget includes a significant increase in emergency farm
     assistance over the $4.2 billion in the vetoed bill. The final budget provides total emergency
     assistance to farmers and ranchers of about $6 billion -- that's 40 percent more assistance
     than the bill the President vetoed. The final bill increased the amount for crop loss
     compensation by_$228 million, and increased the amount for economic loss
     compensation by $1.4 billion, bringing the amounts for these to $2.6 billion and $3.1
     billion, respectively.

     USDA Discrimination Claim Payments. The final budget includes an improved version
     of the language waiving the statute oflimitations on minority farmer discrimination claims
     against USDA than was included in Agriculture Appropriation bill. The final version is
     substantially the same as the Senate-passed version drafted by Senator Robb. Unlike the
     vetoed version, the final bill waives the statute of limitations on claims stemming from
     alleged discrimination in USDA's housing loan program, as well as the farm loan program
                                                              Automated Records Management system
                                                5
                                                              Heil.-Dwnp Conversion
      was not in the vetoed version, urging the Secretary of Agriculture to resolve claim cases
      within 180 days from when claims are filed. With this language, discrimination claims from
      1981 to 1996 that had been barred by the statute of limitations will be expeditiously resolved
      by USDA.




....And to Financial Turmoil Abroad

      Full IMF Funding To Help Address International Financial Crisis. With America's
      fiscal house in order, the United States is now the bulwark of economic stability in the world.
       Some other nations around the world, however, are experiencing major economic upheaval,
      hurting our exports, fanners, and ranchers. A strong International Monetary Fund is a
      stabilizing force in the world economy and is a critical piece of President Clinton's strategy
      to protect the international financial system -- and therefore the U.S. economy -- against the
      risk of new, escalating, or spreading crises. President Clinton fought for and won full
      funding of $17.9 billion for the IMP -- a critical part of his strategy to help address the global
      financial crisis and to keep our economy strong. A stronger IMF will give the U.S. and its
      allies new flexibility in developing responses to protect the world from the spread of the
      financial crisis.

      Fully Funds President Clinton's Child Labor Initiative. In his State of the Union
      address, the President pledged to send legislation to Congress to fight abusive child labor and
      proposed making the United States the world leader in supporting programs to reduce
      abusive child labor, with a 10-fold increase in our commitment to the International
      Programme for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), from $3 million to $30 million a
      year. While the Senate, with the strong leadership of Senator Harkin, fully funded the
      President's request, the House failed to do so, providing only $6 million. In the final
      budget, Congress agreed to the President's full request of$30 million for !PEe. The
      budget also fully funds the President's $9 million request for domestic enforcement and
      a migrant youth job-training demonstration.

Moves People from Welfare to Work and Empowers Communities
President Clinton and Vice President Gore are committed to tapping the potential of
America's urban and rural communities. This budget moves forward on their vision to help
revitalize America's communities:

      50,000 Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers. President Clinton's FY 1999 Budget
      included $283 million for 50,000 new vouchers exclusively for people who need housing
      assistance to make the transition from welfare to work. The original House bill
      included $100 million, while the Senate provided only $40 million. The final budget
      includes President Clinton's full request of $283 million for 50,000 welfare-to-work
      housing vouchers.

      Flexible Funding for Empowerment Zones. President Clinton and Vice President Gore
      requested mandatory funding for second-round urban and rural Empowerment Zones. The
      final budget includes $60 million in this flexible funding for the next round of Empowerment
      Zones and 20 new rural Enterprise Communities.                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   6
requested a major expansion ofthe CDFI program to continue building a national network of
community development banks. The original House bill froze CDFI funding at $80 million,
while the Senate cut funding to $55 million. The final budget increases CDFI funding from
$80 million in FY98 to $95 million in FY99 -- a 19-percent increase.

Public Housing Reform. This legislation makes the President's landmark housing reform
a reality. This bipartisan bill will allow more economic integration and deconcentration in
our Nation's public housing, encourage and reward work, provide protections for those most
in need, and put the Nation back into the housing business with the first new housing
vouchers in five years.

FHA Loan Limit Increased. President Clinton's FY99 budget included an increase in the
FHA loan limit to expand homeownership opportunities to more Americans. The final
budget includes an increase in the FHA loan limit, raising the limit from $86,317 to
$109,032 in the lowest cost areas and from $170,300 to $197,621 in the highest cost areas.

"Play-by-the-Rules" Homeownership Initiative. President Clinton's FY99 budget
included $25 million for the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation to start the
"Play-by-the-Rules" homeownership initiative, which would make homeownership more
accessible to 10,000 families who have good rental histories, but are not adequately served in
the housing market. The final budget includes $25 million for this new initiative.

Increased Funding for Homeless Assistance. The President proposed a major expansion
ofHUD's continuum of care program, designed to help homeless persons obtain health care,
jobs, and permanent housing. The final budget includes $975 million in funds for the
homeless -- a $152 million, or 18 percent, increase over last year.

HUD Fair Housing. The President proposed a major expansion ofHUD's Fair Housing
programs, as part of his "One America" initiative. The final budget expands HUD's Fair
Housing programs from $30 million in FY98 to $40 million in FY99. That 33-percent
increase includes $7.5 million for a new audit-based enforcement initiative proposed by the
Administration.

Regional Opportunity Counseling. The Administration requested funds to help counsel
Section 8 certificate and voucher holders on their full range of housing options. While the
Senate did not include any funding for this initiative, the final budget includes $10 million
for this voluntary effort to expand the housing and employment opportunities available to
low-income families.

Expansion of HUD's Youthbuild Program. The Administration proposed expanding
funds for Youthbuild by more than a quarter. While the original House bill provided $35
million and the Senate provided $40 million, the final budget includes $42.5 million -- an
increase of over 20 percent.

Cleaning Up Brownfields. The Administration proposed $91 million for EPA's
brownfield activities, such as grants for site assessment and community planning. The final
budget includes the President's request of$91 million.
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                              7
       budget included an expansion ofCDBG. The final budget increases funding for CDBG
       from $4.675 billion in FY98 to $4.750 billion in FY99 -- that's a $75 million expansion this
       year.

       Increased Help For Communities Suffering From Sudden and Severe Economic
       Dislocation. President Clinton's FY99 budget included a 10-percent increase in funds for
       EDA so that they can better respond to sudden and severe economic dislocation. The final
       budget increases funding for EDA from $361 million to $393 million -- that's a 9-percent
       expansion this year.

       Expansion of NADBank. The Administration proposed providing the North American
       Development Bank's (NADBank) Community Adjustment and Investment Program $37
       million of paid-in capital, which would allow the Bank to leverage private capital markets to
       provide additional financing to trade-affected communities. The final budget includes $10
       million of paid-in capital for the NADBank.

       $75 Million for Welfare-to-Work Transportation Funds. While the House and Senate
       provided $50 million -- the minimum amount "guaranteed" in the transportation bill -- the
       final Qudget includes $75 million for this competitive grant program. These funds will
       assist states and localities in developing flexible transportation alternatives, such as van
       services, to help fonner welfare recipients and other low income workers get to work.

       Heating and Cooling Assistance for Low-Income Families Protected. More than five
       million low-income families receive help to pay for home heating costs through this
       program, yet the House Republicans tried to eliminate it. The final budget includes the
       President's full request for funding to help low-income families pay for home heating and
       cooling assistance.

Advances a Strong Health and Technology Research Agenda
For six years in a row, President Clinton and Vice President Gore have proposed substantial
increases in the Federal government's research and development portfolio to build a healthier, more
prosperous, and productive future. In FY 1999, the President proposed, within the first balanced
budget in a generation, the largest commitment to key civilian research in the history of our country
as part ofthe "Research Fund for America." Congress agreed to support significant increases in
R&D, including:

       Expansion of National Science Foundation. President Clinton proposed a major
       expansion of research and development funds for the National Science Foundation (NSF).
       The final budget includes a 7-percent increase -- from $3.4 billion in FY98 to $3.7 billion in
       FY99 -- in the NSF research budget to support science and engineering research across all
       fields and disciplines. NSF supports nearly half of the non-medical basic research
       conducted at universities.

       Expansion of National Institutes of Health for Biomedical Research. President Clinton's
       FY99 budget included the largest-ever dollar increase in funds for the National Institutes of
       Health (NIH). The final budget includes almost $2 billion expansion ofNlli research
       funding -- a 14-percent increase. Scientists are on the cusp of important new breakthroughs

                                                   8                Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
       and prevent some of our most devastating diseases. This increase will enable scientists to
       pursue a wide range of cutting edge research from Alzheimers to AIDS to genetic discoveries.


       Expansion of Energy Department Science Budget. President Clinton's FY99 included an
       8 percent increase in the Department of Energy's science budget, including support for the
       National Spallation Neutron Source. The final budget fully funds the President's request.

       Funds Next Generation Internet. In his State of the Union address, President Clinton
       said, "I ask Congress to step up support for building the next generation Internet... And the
       next generation Internet will operate at speeds up to a thousand times faster than today."
       The final budget includes more than $100 million funding for the Next Generation Internet, a
       Federal R&D initiative which will connect more than 100 universities at speeds that are up to
       1,000 times faster than today's Internet, and establish the foundation for the networks and
       applications (e.g. telemedicine, distance learning) of the 21st century.

       Expansion in Advanced Technology Program (ATP). President Clinton's FY99 budget
       proposed an expansion of ATP to promote cutting-edge high-technology projects. While the
       Senate froze funding at the FY98 level and the House cut funding by $13 million, the final
       budget increases ATP funding to $204 million -- an $11 million increase over last year --
       which will allow for about $70 million in new awards to develop high-risk technologies that
       promise significant commercial payoffs and widespread economic benefits.

Improving the Public Health of America
For six years, President Clinton and Vice President Gore have been working hard to expand our
Nation's health care investments, including research, prevention, and quality care for more
Americans.

U      New Efforts to Prevent and Treat HIV/AIDS. The Congress has responded to the President's
       and Vice President's request to substantially increase efforts to prevent and treat HIV/AIDS.
       Congress has provided $1.4 billion for Ryan White Care Act activities. This funding level
       includes a 61-percent increase for the AIDS drug assistance program, which provides funds
       to States to help uninsured and underinsured people with life-saving treatments for
       HIV/AIDS. In addition, Congress provided about $630 million for HIV prevention
       activities at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

U      Historic $130 Million Effort to Address HIV/AIDS in Minority Community. Minority
       communities m.ake up the fastest growing portion of the HIV/ AIDS caseload (44 percent of
       all new HIV cases). Today, the final budget makes an unprecedented $130 million
       investment, including $50 million in emergency funding that will improve prevention efforts
       in high risk communities, and expand access to cutting edge HIV therapies and other
       treatment needed for HIV/AIDS, and the Department of Health and Human Services will
       invest $20 million of existing resources to address this problem.

U      Critical New Investments to Protect Public Health at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
       The Congress has responded to President Clinton's request for a $2.4 billion investment -- a

                                                   9                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
    host of public health challenges, including fighting emerging infectious diseases, combating
    new resistance to anti-biotics, and improving prevention for some of our nation's leading
    killers, such as diabetes, HIVI AIDS, and heart disease.

U   New Efforts to Improve the Quality of Health Care. Congress has responded to the
    President's request for a $25 million investment in new research at the Agency of Health
    Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) to improve the quality of the health care delivery
    system. Identifying critical health care problems and educating health plans, medical
    professionals, patients, and advocates about solutions can lead to important improvements in
    the quality of health care. For example, overuse of antibiotics has been shown to lead to
    resistance and cost as much as $7.5 billion a year. AHCPR's development and dissemination
    of guidelines for the appropriate use of antibiotics will result in better patient care and
    significant health care savings.

U   Increasing Funding to Provide Health Insurance to Low-Income Children in Puerto
    Rico and the Territories. Thousands of uninsured children in both Puerto Rico and
    the other territories will now be eligible for meaningful health care coverage for the
    first time under the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP). The territories
    were currently on schedule to receive an inadequate and inequitable $10.7 million.
    Today, the Congress responded to the President's request and provided the territories
    with an additional $153 million over five years for their new CHIP programs that will
    meet the needs of their uninsured children.

U   Funding the President's Commitment to Eliminate Racial Health Disparities.
    Minorities suffer from higher rates for a number of critical diseases. For example, African
    Americans under the age of 65 have twice the rate of heart disease as whites, and Native
    Americans suffer from diabetes at nearly three times the average rate. The Congress has
    taken a critical first step in investing in the President's multi-year proposal to eliminate racial
    health disparities in six health areas, including HIV/AIDS, cancer, diabetes, and
    immunizations. The Congress has given the Administration authority to fund its proposed
    $30 million grants for communities to develop new strategies to address these disparities and
    has granted the President's request for increases in other critical public health programs, such
    as heart disease and diabetes prevention at CDC, that have proven effective in attacking these
    disparities.


Other Highlights ...
    Reduces Backlog and Expands Alternative Dispute Resolution at Equal Employment
    Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The President's FY99 budget included $279 million
    -- a $37 million increase over the previous year -- to significantly expand EEOC's alternative
    dispute resolution program and reduce the backlog of private sector discrimination
    complaints. The final budget fully funds the President's request -- providing the first real
    increase for EEOC in several years.

    President Clinton's Food Safety Initiative. The final budget provided approximately $75

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                10
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
far-ranging plan to improve surveillance of food borne illnesses, education about proper food
handling, research, and inspection of imported and domestic foods. The new funds are part
of an Administration-wide effort, led by the Department of Agriculture and the Department
of Health and Human Services, to create a seamless, science-based food safety system.

More Police on the Streets. In 1994, President Clinton fought for and won a commitment
to put 100,000 police officers on the street. The final budget includes funds for 17,000
additional Community Oriented Police Services (COPS) Program police officers toward the
President's goal of 100,000 cops on the beat by 2000.

Increasing Law Enforcement in Indian Country. In his FY1999 budget, the President
requested a $25 million increase for law enforcement in Indian country. The final bill
includes the President's full request. This funding will go to more police officers and
public safety initiatives in the approximately 56 million acres of Indian lands serving
more than 1.4 million residents.

Brings Financial Stability to Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). The final budget
includes $50 million that will allow TVA to better provide for the citizens of the seven
states -- Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, and
Virginia -- that it serves. The agreement will let TVA refinance part of its debt to
compensate for the loss of Federal funds for its non-power programs. The final
budget also prevents TVA from losing the Land Between the Lakes Recreation Area.




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                          11




               DESPITE ALL THE PROGRESS IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET,
                    THERE Is STILL MUCH WORK LEFT TO Do

     In the waning days ofthe session, the President and Congressional Democrats prevailed in
     making critical investments in advancing the President's agenda. However, much work remains
     for the future because Republicans in Congress killed, at least for now, critical priorities,
     including:

     JC     School Modernization Tax Credits. Beginning with his State of the Union address, the
            President fought all year to modernize our schools. His fully paid for tax credits would
            have leveraged nearly $22 billion in bonds to build and renovate schools. In the final
            days of the budget negotiations, Republicans in Congress refused to even meet on the
            critical issue of school construction.

            Patients Bill of Rights. President Clinton repeatedly urged the Congress to pass a
            strong, enforceable patients' bill of rights that would assure Americans the quality health
            care they need. Congressional Republicans killed this year's effort to pass a Patients Bill
            of Rights.

     JC     Comprehensive Tobacco Legislation. This year, President Clinton made passage of
           legislation to reduce youth smoking a top priority, in order to stop kids from smoking
           before they start through a significant price increase, measures to prevent tobacco
           companies from marketing to children, and critical public health prevention and
           education programs. Congressional Republicans opted to act as politicians instead of
           parents, and killed this year's effort to pass bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation
           to reduce youth smoking.

     JC    Campaign Finance Reform. At the beginning ofthe year, the President made passage of
           bipartisan, comprehensive 'campaign finance reform a priority for his Administration. After
           months of delay, the House of Representatives overcame defenders ofthe status quo and
           passed the Shays-Meehan bill. However, the Senate Republicans killed this historic
           legislation.

     JC    Child Care Initiative. In his State of the Union, the President proposed an historic
           child care initiative to make child care better, safer and more affordable for America's
           working families. The President's proposal included $7.5 billion over 5 years for child
           care subsidies for low-income working families and tax credits to help 3 million working
           families pay for child care. The Republicans refused to support these critical
           investments.

     JC    Speeding Toxic Cleanups. President Clinton called for an additional $650 million -- a
           40 percent increase -- to accelerate Superfund cleanups with a goal of completing a total
           of900 cleanups by 2001. The Republican majority refused these funds, threatening to
           delay cleanup at up to 171 sites across the country.
     JC    Work Incentives Bill for People with Disabilities. At the commemoration of the
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


          Americans with Disabilities Act last July, the President endorsed the bipartisan
          Jeffords-Kennedy bill that enables people with disabilities to go back to work by
          providing an option to buy into Medicaid and Medicare, as well as other pro-work
          initiatives. This bill was on the list of top Administration priorities in the final
          budget negotiations, but rejected by Republicans. The President will continue to
          fight to give people with disabilities the opportunity to work --including the critical
          health insurance that makes work possible.

     JC   Education Opportunity Zones. President Clinton, in his budget, called for Education
          Opportunity Zones to help high-poverty urban and rural communities increase student
          achievement by raising standards, improving teaching, ending social promotions, and
          turning around failing schools. The Republican majority refused to provide the
          requested $200 million in funds, which would have helped about 50 high-poverty,
          low-achieving, urban and rural school districts.

     JC   Minimum Wage. President Clinton and Congressional Democrats called for a $1
          increase in the minimum wage over two years -- to raise the wages of 12 million workers.
           For someone who works full-time, this minimum wage increase would have meant
          an additional $2,000 per year. However, 95 percent of Senate Republicans voted to
          kill the President's minimum wage increase.

          Medicare Buy-In. President Clinton proposed providing new options for
          Americans ages 55 to 65 to obtain health insurance, including buying into Medicare.
           This policy would not have hurt the Medicare Trust Fund. The Republican
          majority killed this new initiative that would have helped provide health care to
          hundreds of thousands of vulnerable Americans.




                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


