RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-0CT-1998 13:34:38.00

SUBJECT:     gary black

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Settlement Update: Congress Fails To Put Icing On The Cake. Deal Likely
                   To Slip Past Election Day.



Gary Black (212) 756-4197
Jon Rooney (212) 756-4504

October 16, 1998



HIGHLIGHTS

    1.The failure by the states to secure a waiver from the federal
government
      permitting states to keep all funds from any new tobacco settlement
is a
      modest negative, but doesn't materially change our view that
substantially all
      the states will embrace the deal. Republican leaders Lott, Armey, and
Gingrich
      balked at White House demands on how the states should spend the
money.
      The spending bill agreed to yesterday contained no language
clarifying the
      federal government's ability to bring Medicare claims.
    2.We now expect the industry will wait until after the election
 (November 3) to
      announce the new AG accord, to ensure that tobacco stays off the radar
      screen as a potential campaign issue. Because anti-tobacco officials
will likely
      tout the new AG accord as too lenient on the industry, Republicans
could be
      hurt as voters are reminded about the death of the much tougher
McCain bill.
    3.We expect all small manufacturers except Liggett to embrace the new
deal. We
      expect states who sign the deal to pass legislation requiring
renegades to
      make payments into a trust equal to what these renegades would have
paid
      under the proposed deal .. Unlike the proposed settlement, trust
payments
      would not offer a carve-out for last year's share, and not be tax


deductible
       (owner-ship retained by the renegades). Liggett can argue that its
agreements
      with 41 states exempt Liggett from payment requirements.
    4.We are less concerned than we were that states might double-cross the
      industry (i.e., embrace the deal, obtain consent decrees, then pass
statutes
      imposing licensing fees that do not give credits to signatories). We
have been
      told that the industry can make the deal contingent upon actions of
third
      parties (i.e. legislators), and void the deal if states take actions
that violate the
      terms.
    5.While investors may view the failure by states to secure a federal
waiver on
      Medicaid recovery and a further delay in timing as reason to take
profits, we
      would use today's weakness as another buying opportunity,
particularly on
      Philip Morris. The Philip Morris buyback should begin after the
opt-in period
       (7-14 days from announcement of the deal). Spinoff speculation will
follow.



   6.We reiterate outperform ratings on Philip Morris (price target $60),
RJR ($40),
     and UST ($40).

ADDITIONAL DETAILS

      1.Failure by states to get federal waiver doesn't change odds of deal.
The
       failure by the White House and Senate Republicans to agree on
       a provision that would have permitted the states to keep all
       tobacco settlement money (feds have right to recover 50-80%
       of settlement proceeds) followed White House demands that a
       s¥bstantial chunk be spent on public health initiatives found in
       McCain's failed tobacco bill. This does not materially change
       our outlook for a new settlement between the industry and the
       AGs. With the exception of four states that we have previously
       flagged as unlikely to embrace the deal (MD, trial begins in
       January; MA, trial begins in February; MI,WI) we expect
       substantially all the AGs to embrace the new accord. We have
       been told that the deal may be held up until after Election Day
       (11/3). Republicans appear to be nervous that any new accord
       will be attacked by the anti-tobacco crowd as too sweet for the
       industry, causing the media to remind voters -- in the prime of
       the Election season-- how Republicans killed the much tougher
       McCain bill. At this juncture, it might be prudent to wait until
       after Election Day.

       In talking with negotiators, we are struck by the powerful
       synergies of the renegade provisions in the new accord: One,
       renegade credits (multiplier set at 3x) are paid only by states
       who don't pass legislation requiring non-signatories to pay into
       trust at least what the signatories pay; as the number of states
       without these provisions dwindles, each non-conforming state


    pays more. Two, the renegade carve-out permits smaller
    players to pay nothing as long as their share remains below
    base 1997 levels. The smaller players would clearly be better
    off embracing the deal than making payments to the states; if
    they don't embrace the deal, renegades would make payments
    on all share (not just the increase over 1997 share), and
    payments would be non-tax-deductible.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 039 - FOLDER -009


[10/20/1998 - 1012111998]


