 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:24-FEB-1997 14:35:45.00

 SUBJECT:    working groups

 TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 can you take a stab at this for the 2 she assigned us plus education
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 02/24/97
 02:35 PM ---------------------------



         BROPHY S @ A1
         02/24/97 10:49:00 AM
 Record Type: Record

 To: Gene B. Sperling, Bruce N. Reed, Franklin D. Raines
 cc:
 Subject: working groups

          Erskine has scheduled a 2pm meeting for tomorrow to discuss how
          the Administration will proceed with the working groups
 identified
          by the Congressional leadership and the POTUS for early
 bipartisan
          cooperation and has asked Legislative Affairs to coordinate this
          effort. As you recall, the five issues groups are:  taxes;
          juvenile justice; welare to work; D.C.; and education.

            John and I met with the bipartisan leadership staff on Friday to
            share information on how to structure our bipartisan efforts,
            including:  the composition of the task forces, possible agendas
            and timing.

            We decided that to satisfy the political needs of all invleved,
            the process would need to be very inclusive. As a consequence,
 we
            anticipate that each issue working group will include
            approximately 25 prinicipals (6 each from the Democrats and
            Republicans in the House, four to five each from the Democrats
 and
            Republicans in the Senate, and three to five from the
            Administration). The Congressional principals will most likely
 be
            the chairs and ranking members from the authoriziing committees
            and in some cases might include appropriatiors or chairs of task
            forces previously established by the Leaders. The Administration
            positions will be filled by Cabinet officials and White House
            policy staff.

            The purpose of the groups will be to identify areas of bipartisan
            agreement and consensus and to report to the Leadership within a
            certain period of time.  The group will acknowledge and lay aside
            areas where bipartisan agreement is unlikely.



            John and I are meeting again on Wednesday to review draft lists
of
            the principals recommended for each issue working group.  In
            addition, each of the five offices will produce lists of the
items
            that they would like to see included in the agenda for each of
the
            five issue working groups. We also intend to discuss the
timetable
            for reporting to the POTUS and Congressional leadership.

            Therefore, for tomorrow's meeting we will need by 6 pm TODAY your
            recommendations:  for the agenda items in your issue area
            (Gene-education, Bruce -Juvenile Justice and Welfare to Work,
            Frank- D.C., and Rubin-Taxes); the Administration principals (3
to
            5) that you recommend for your issue area; and the likely
            timetable for completion.

            We will also ask you to make a presentation of this information
            tomorrow in Erskine's meeting.  Please let me know if you have
            questions.  Thanks


