RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-0CT-199B 12:14:29.00

SUBJECT:   Poverty Measures

TO: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Gene is likely to talk to Bruce and Jack Lew about several pending issues
related to the Census Poverty Measures.  I've sent over by red dot copies
of the latest draft memo to principals (dated 8/25) that Gene just
reviewed with NEC staff,  a 10/22 summary from OMB of more alternative
measures they'd like Census to include, and a draft outline of Census'
report (though this appears to have changed a bit).  Here's where things
stand:

Back in late July, the major unresolved issue was whether Census should
produce some unbenchmarked measures along with benchmarked measures. At
our last meeting on this (7/20, which I think Elena attended), we also
discussed whether staff were comfortable with what we thought was Census'
plan to highlight only 3-4 measures and consensus was this should go to
principals too.  Though there was talk of doing a principal's meeting on
these issues (hence draft memo), it got overtaken by events. NEC staff
were waiting to discuss the issues, and the memo, with Gene and that
finally happened this weekend. Gene doesn't think there's a need for a
big meeting on this -- instead he plans to talk to Bruce and Jack "sooner
rather than later".

Benchmarking
Census was, and still is, inclined to only publish benchmarked measures
(so any alternative povery rates would equal the official 1997 rate in
aggregate, though rates for difference groups might change). Bruce, this
was your preference anyway, but the memo lays out lots of pros and cons.
It's my understanding is Gene hasn't taken a firm position on this but is
generally sympathetic to keeping our options open.

Number of measures
As the draft memo and the OMB summary indicate, Census is planning to
highlight 3-4 "combination" measures. An earlier chapter of their
proposed report will deal with a broader range of issues (such as
geographic variation and housing), but Census would then pick several
combinations of these variables to highlight.  OMB feels very strongly
that Census should publish every permutation and combination, otherwise it
will appear that decisions have already been made about which direction
the Administration is heading. NEC also believes Census should highlight
more measures (though maybe around 8 rather than 12) .  Earlier, we had
thought Census would provide more info on the broader set of alternatives


before highlighting the 3-4. It now appears that they will only provide
minimal information about the broader set.

It's my understanding that the product Census plans to publish in March is
a report, not a notice in the federal register for comment. However the
research and academic community is eagerly awaiting this report and U. of
WI has already scheduled a big conference on it for April. The report is
not an official indication of how the government intends to change the
poverty measure; rather it is more like a response to the NAS/NRC
recommendation with a range of alternatives. Nevertheless, there's
considerable concern from NEC and OMB about avoiding any perception of
political influence and a feeling that if Census only highlights a narrow
range of options, it will appear that either there was influence,
decisions had already been made about some issues, or it might be harder
to go back and pick up other options later.

If there is a decision to suggest to Census that they highlight more
measures, both OMB and NEC would argue that some of these should not be
benchmarked.

I don't have a substantive problem with having more measures highlighted
    this could diffuse the reaction to anyone alternative measure, and
make it more technical/less political. However, from a process
standpoint,  telling Census to publish more measures may risk some of the
same concern about meddling.  If we do nothing, Census will likely
highlight 3-4 benchmarked measures.  I'd be glad to discuss if that would
be helpful.


