RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-0CT-1998 16:00:34.00

SUBJECT:   NPR transcript

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The following is yesterday's NPR Morning Edition story on Oregon's Welfare
Reform.  We should get today's tomorrow.  I think it overstates the issue
of time limits -- fed law allows states to define work for the purposes of
meeting the 2 year work requirement and nothing here would have run into
the 5 year time limit on assistance.  But, nevertheless, it's a good
story. The one this a.m. was all about how OR has combined substance abuse
treatment with TANF, and was very encouraging (and timely) .


                                         NPR

                     SHOW: NPR MORNING EDITION (NPR 10:00 am ET)

                              OCTOBER 27, 1998, TUESDAY

                              Transcript # 98102705-210
TYPE: PACKAGE

SECTION: News; Domestic

LENGTH: 1564 words

HEADLINE: Oregon Welfare System

BYLINE: Ina Jaffe, Hillsboro; Bob Edwards., Washington, DC

HIGHLIGHT:
In the first of two reports, NPR's Ina Jaffe reports on th welfare system
in Oregon.  It's considered one of the best in the country, although some
of its rules go against the Federal Welfare Reform Law passed two years
ago.

BODY:

BOB EDWARDS, HOST: This is NPR's MORNING EDITION.     I'm Bob Edwards.

welfare rolls across the country have dropped by about a third in the two
years since the federal welfare reform law was passed. One of the states
leading the way is Oregon, where welfare rolls have declined nearly 60
percent since 1994.

State officials say one reason for Oregon's success is more experience.


The state's experiments with welfare reform go back to the late 1980s, and
because of that head start Oregon's been allowed to develop its own
approach to welfare, even if some of it contradicts what's in the federal
welfare reform law.

NPR's Ina Jaffe reports.

INA JAFFE, NPR REPORTER: Federal law now says that most welfare recipients
have two years to start working or they can lose their benefits. And they
lose their benefits after five years anyway, no matter what. Almost two
dozen states have gone even further than the federal law, terminating
benefits in two years or less.

But in Oregon time limits aren't a concern for welfare clients like Tammy.

SOUNDBITE OF PHONE RINGING


TAMMY, OREGON WELFARE CLIENT: She should be back in -- shortly. Could I get
your name and number and have her call you back?

JAFFE: Tammy's just starting her first job, a state-subsidized temporary
job at that, after spending nine years on welfare.

TAMMY: And the opportunity that I've been given with this position is very
exciting for me and I'm very grateful for it, especially from where I came
from.

  JAFFE: The opportunity she's been given is a clerical job at the Oregon
  Human Resources Office in Beaverton, a Portland suburb. And where she came
  from was the world of drug addiction, where she spent eight years.  She
  lived off her welfare benefits, the part she didn't spend on drugs.  She's
. not proud of the life she gave her three kids then.

TAMMY: We lived in our car at one point in time.   We lived in a little camp
trailer out in the middle of nowhere that didn't have a toilet or
refrigerator, you know, and we just kept 'things cold in an ice chest. And
it wasn't a pretty picture.

JAFFE: But during those years, Oregon began implementing parts of its
welfare reform program.

TAMMY: I was hearing from friends that it's not as easy to slide through
the cracks anymore.  You're not going to be able to get assistance like you
have, and then where are you going to be?

JAFFE: So she went to see her caseworker, whom she pretty much avoided up
'til then.

TAMMY: I went in tears and said, "I can't do this anymore." And so that's
when I got honest with my caseworker and when I decided that somebody had
to be responsible.

JAFFE: Responsibility is the main thing oregon expects of its welfare
clients: agreeing to an individualized plan for self- sufficiency, then
sticking to it.

For Tammy, that's meant six months at a residential drug treatment
facility,
 followed by career counseling, life skills counseling, computer classes


a whole host of programs.

TAMMY: All of the little pieces that fit together that eventually will make
a person employed and employable.

JAFFE: But Tammy isn't quite there yet.  She's still on welfare, only now
she's in a program where she receives her cash assistance in the form of a
paycheck. She needs more work experience and more self- confidence before
she can go into the working world without a safety net.

But that's OK, because in Oregon there's no effective time limit on how
long someone can receive welfare, explains Sandy Hobek (ph), the
administrator of Adult and Family Services.


SANDY HOBEK, ADMINISTRATOR, OREGON ADULT AND FAMILY SERVICES: The state
obligation is that we provide the right sets of services and supports for
the client, and the client's responsibility is to come in and to
participate and to work with us. And if that contract is working, then it
does not make sense to us to put an arbitrary time limit on that
progression.

JAFFE: The lack of effective time limits is one big difference between the
Oregon welfare plan and federal law. Another special exemption or waiver
has made it possible for Oregon to offer more training and counseling
services before recipients are pushed into jobs.

Nevertheless, there has been a st~ady stream of welfare clients moving into
the work force.  Independent studies point to Oregon as one of the national
leaders in placing welfare recipients in jobs.

But some critics of Oregon's welfare program don't think poverty is
declining nearly as fast as the case load. Lisa wendt (ph) is a policy
advocate at the Oregon Food Bank, which supplies emergency food pantries
around the state.

LISA WENDT, POLICY ADVOCATE, OREGON FOOD BANK: Demand is at 5 percent
across the state, and the increase in 5 percent this year also represents
20,000 people. And I think that might be the more significant number.  So
that's over 400,000 people who have gotten emergency food boxes in the past
year.

JAFFE: And the study commissioned by the Oregon Center for Public Policy
points out that while the welfare case load is down, the food stamp case
load is up. The report argues that while there are fewer families on cash
assistance, there are many more working poor Oregonians now than there were
a couple of decades ago.

RILEY, FIVE-YEAR-OLD SON OF OREGON WELFARE CLIENT MISTY: Are we gonna
leave?

MISTY, OREGON WELFARE CLIENT: Yeah.   (Unintelligible) go get you ready for
school.

JAFFE: Twenty-four-year-old Misty might be considered   one of Oregon's
working poor.  She has a three-year-old son Riley and   an 18- month-old
daughter named Tabitha.  She also has a full-time job   in an eyeglasses
store that pays Oregon's minimum wage of $6 an hour.    She found the job
after just a few weeks in the state's welfare-to-work   program.


MISTY: It teaches you how to get out, look for jobs. They make you write
down the hours. You have to put in 40 hours a week, and if you don't then
they give you a little talking to,. but that's all right.

JAFFE: Had you worked much before?

MISTY: Off and on when I was allowed to;  I should say my kids's dad didn't
really want me working, he wanted me to stay at home, and I was unhappy.
And now that have a full-time job it's -- I am extremely happy.

JAFFE: Was that an issue between the two of you, that he liked to know
exactly where you were every minute?

MISTY: Oh, yes. The minute I woke up, he had to have a list of where I
was,
 who I was going with, when I'd be back. And it was hard. It was like I
was a three-year-old.  I didn't like it.


JAFFE: So she left him and went to a shelter for battered women. Now she
and her two children live with her mother. They can't afford a place of
their own on Misty's salaries.  Her pay may be more than twice the $460 a
month she used to get from welfare, but it still puts her just below the
official poverty line.

Today, Misty's visiting her caseworker in the Portland suburb of Hillsboro
to renew her paperwork for food stamps.   Even though she's working now, she
still needs a lot of help from the state.

MISTY: I've gotten all kinds of services: food stamps, day   care, gas
vouchers, help with trying to find schooling for Riley for   Head Start,
clothes -- everything.  I mean just the littlest thing and   they -- they're
right there. They bend over backwards to help. And that's    great, I love
it.

JAFFE: And the state may be helping Misty for some time to come. She'd have
to earn another two to three dollars an hour before she lost her
eligibility for such benefits as subsidized child care and food stamps.
Misty's caseworker, Donna Butler, says there's still always something they
have to talk about.

DONNA BUTLER, OREGON WELFARE CASEWORKER: We try to communicate every month,
and we usually do.  If it's not sitting down together, it's definitely on
the phone a couple of times a month.  Different issues come up about day
care or, "Give me a phone number for some legal help because I'm pursuing
child support," or whatever.

MISTY: A lot of times it's just to see how things are going between me and
the kids's dad and how the kids are doing, how I'm doing, things with my
job, just in life general, just to make sure everything's OK.

JAFFE: As far as Misty's concerned, everything is OK now. She may be
earning just minimum wage, but the transformation of her life has been too
profound to measure in dollars and cents.

Ina Jaffe, NPR News, Hillsboro, Oregon.

EDWARDS: Ninety percent of adults who remain on welfare in Oregon have
severe obstacles to employment, such as drug addiction, domestic violence
or mental illness.  Tomorrow, how the state is trying to address that


problem.

This is a rush transcript. This copy may not be in its final form and may
be updated.


Michael Kharfen
HHS Administration for Children & Families
mkharfen@acf.dhhs.gov
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov
(202) 401-9215 phone
(202) 205-9688 fax

Original Text
From: <Andrea_Kane@opd.eop.gov>, on 10/28/98 9:36 AM:
Michael, can you get the NPR transcript from this morning and yesterday and
send me a copy. May also want to include in your daily WR clips so others
can see it. Today, it was an Ina Jaffe story on Oregon. Apparently it was
2nd of 2 part story but I didn't hear it yesterday.   I'm finally getting
Lexus/Nexus access next week so I can get these myself.   thanks
---------------------- Forwarded by Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP on 10/28/98 09:36
AM ---------------------------



  (Embedded
 image moved   Patricia Savage Bravo <pbravo @ acf.dhhs.gov>
 to file:      10/28/98 09:07:57 AM
 PIC16049.PCX)




Please respond to pbravo@acf.dhhs.gov

Record Type:    Record


To:   Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP

cc:
Subject:   Re: NJ study




Darn. I missed it.

Original Text
From: <Andrea_Kane@opd.eop.gov>, on 10/28/98 8:10 AM:
thanks.  if you didn't hear it, there was a good story on NPR this a.m. reo
OR's efforts to serve the hard to serve welfare recipients, focusing on
substance abuse.


