RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-0CT-1998 09:59:40.00

SUBJECT:   Defibrillators

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Today's Post story attached. As I've told Chris, my efforts here have
been
stymied by HHS. O'hara recently reported to me that Blood and Lung have
postponed
 doing their study until next year. I agree with the Heart Association in
this story -- that the
 science is running ahead of the public policy. Maybe we should turn this
into
a police issue or though DOT which has a heart program.

                    Officers Armed With Lifesaving Machines
                    Police Among Nonmedical Personnel Now Using Portable
                    Heart Defibrillators

                    By Maria Glod
                    Washington Post Staff Writer
                    Wednesday, October 28, 1998; Page B01

                  Larry Vance and his wife were unloading their
tractor-trailer at the new
                  Leesburg outlet mall when he suddenly slumped over.
Rhonda Vance
                  rushed to him, cradled him-in her arms and watched
helplessly as he turned
                  blue and lost consciousness.

                    "He fell against me," she said,   "and I just knew he was
dead. "

                    Rhonda Vance hollered for someone to call 911. However,
even before an
                    ambulance arrived at the scene, Leesburg police officer
Steven Pebler


                     showed up.

                     That turned out to be Vance's good fortune. After a
quick check showed
                     no signs of a pulse, Pebler cut open Vance's shirt and
hooked him up to a
                     machine about the size of a "fishing tackle box," said Rh
onda Vance,
                     recalling the Oct. 5 incident.

                     Pebler called out: "I'm clear. You're clear. Everybody
clear. Shocking
                  now!" With the press of a button, a jolt of electricity
ran through the body
                  of the 41-year-old Texan. "I checked fat a pulse, and it
had returned,"
                  Pebler said.

                     Portable heart defibrillators are turning up in more and
more places these
                     days, including inside Leesburg police cruisers, and
many public health
                     officials consider it a major advance that could save t
housands of lives
                     every year.

                     The machines, portable versions of the devices found in
hospital
                     emergency wards but designed to be used by nonmedical
personnel, have
                  been on the market since the mid-1980s and are
increasingly used on
                  airplanes and in shopping malls, concert halls and
office buildings. Jack
                  Kent Cooke Stadium has two on hand.

                   An estimated 350,000 people die from out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest each
                   year in the United States, and many doctors say they
believe that
                   thousands of people could be saved with early use of the
machines, which
                   cost about $3,500 and are known as automated external
defibrillators, or
                   AEDs.

                   But concerns remain about protecting those who
administer the care from
                   lawsuits if something should go wrong. Some medical
professionals also
                   say more research needs to be done on whether it makes
sense, both
                   medically and financially, to put the machines in the
hands of more
                   nonprofessionals.

                  "This has been an evolving process allover the
country," said Robert R.
                  Bass, executive director of the Maryland Institute for
Emergency Medical


                  services. "Maybe someday they will be like a fire exting
uisher that you buy
                  at Kmart and put on the wall, but we just don't know
enough about it yet."

                     Sudden cardiac arrest is usually caused by an electrical
malfunction of the
                  heart known as ventricular fibrillation, during which
the heart quivers and
                  stops pumping blood through the body, causing a person
to stop breathing
                  and lose consciousness.

                   The portable defibrillator, which is attached to a
victim using adhesive
                   electrodes, delivers an electric shock that can restore
the heart's normal
                   beating. Quick treatment is critical after cardiac arr
est because survival
                   rates drop 10 percent each minute the heart quivers.

                     Although widespread public access to the portable units
remains in the
                     early stage, police officers are considered among the
most effective
                  responders outside of rescue crews because they
frequently are the first to
                  arrive at emergency scenes and they are used to handling
stressful
                  si tuations.

                     Leesburg's is among the first police departments in the
Washington area to
                     carry the units. Vienna and Herndon police departments
and the Frederick
                  County, Md., sheriff's office all hope to furnish their
patrol officers with
                  defibrillators by the end of this year or early 1999.

                  Defibrillators were first used in hospitals in the 1960s
and automated units
                  were developed in the 1980s, Bass said. Although early
defibrillators
                  required extensive medical knowledge to operate, the ne
west models can
                  be handled by lay responders after only a few hours of
training.

                     The units, which are about the size of laptop computers,
give voice
                     commands that walk the responder through the treatment
process, analyze
                     the patient's condition and simply tell the responder if
a shock is needed.
                  Built-in safety features only allow a shock.to be
delivered if the device
                  decides it's needed.

                     "When you watch 'ER' and you see George Clooney doing
his thing, it's


                    the physician watching the heart rate and making the
decision," said
                    Elizabeth Selner, spokeswoman for the Minneapolis-based
Survivalink,
                    one of three primary manufacturers of the portable unit.
"What we've done
                    is put the intelligence in the device."

                    Police in Rochester, Minn., have seen a high survival
rate since they
                  became the first department in the country to carry the
units in 1990. As of
                  last November, 23 of 58 cardiac arrest victims treated
by officers survived
                  the episode, according to Roger White, a cardiologist at
the Mayo Clinic
                  and medical director of the city's early defibrillation
program.

                    "The police reach a surprising number of patients before
an ambulance
                    does," White said. "They are already out on the streets,
and they are
                    mobile."

                    Although early programs such as Rochester's and one in
the Pittsburgh
                  suburbs have been successful, White and other medical
experts said it only
                  makes sense to equip police officers with the machines if
 they regularly
                  arrive at emergency scenes before ambulances and medic
units and have
                  the time to respond to medical calls.

                    "For some police departments, it seems to be a whopping
success," said
                  Joseph P. Ornato, a Richmond cardiologist who has
studied the use of the
                  machines. "But each city is going to have to look
carefully at what its
                  standard EMS system provides and the workload of the
police and see
                  whether the AEDs would likely add anything or just add
expense."

                    Howard Dawley, the training captain of Loudoun County
Emergency
                    Medical Services who helped develop the Leesburg police
department's
                    pilot program, said officers patrolling the small town
usually can reach
                  cardiac arrest victims before rescue teams can. The
department has four
                  units and 13 officers trained to use them.

                    Fairfax County's Fire and Rescue Department has been
working with the
                    Herndon and Vienna forces to train their officers for
the same reason,


                     deputy chief Jack Brown said.

                  "In those two towns, the police run a lot of the same
calls we do, and they
                  tend to get there before us," Brown said. "Anything
that's going to improve
                  service and save lives, we want to do."

                  Although it's generally accepted that the units can make
a difference in the
                  hands of firefighters and police officers, broader
public access has been
                  slowed by concerns of liability protection for other
users.

                     "The science is running ahead of the public policy
here," said Rich
                     Hamburg, spokesman for the American Heart Association,
which is
                     heading a nationwide movement in support of legislation
that would shield
                     the responders from lawsuits.

                  Thi. year alone, 15 states have passed legislation
regulating the use of
                  AEDs, according to the American Heart Association. In
all, 22 states
                  explicitly permit the use of the defibrillators by
nonprofessionals with
                  proper training, and all but four of those provide some
immunity for the
                  caregiver under the state's good samaritan act. Still,
some emergency
                  medical providers worry that despite the training and
legal protection, a
                  nonprofessional could panic when treating a cardiac
arrest victim or forget
                  to call 911.

                     Ornato is among the physicians heading a research
project that will
                  compare survival rates at about 300 sites nationwide
where laypeople are
                  trained to use the portable units with similar sites
where only traditional
                  emergency responses -- such as administering
cardiopulmonary
                  resuscitation or calling for help -- are used.

                     "We know flight attendants can safely use these devices,
and we've had
                     some experience in Vegas casinos that appear to be
favorable," Ornato
                  said. "What we'd like to do is test whether that
envelope of individuals
                  could be pushed further."


                              . Copyright 1998 The Washington Post Company
·


