RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-0CT-1998 12:54:17.00

SUBJECT:   Welfare and Tobacco New Ideas

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are the new ideas memos we gave Paul last night.  Since he may need
to edit them down for the memo to the President, I thought you might want
to see these versions.
tobacco
welfare


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D90]MAIL49762530I.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435A040000010A02010000000205000000BB51000000020000BDODEEA312B6F3C100789C
E34BCD42A13A5B5BF3925947D8AF40D4107E9A4CE3A1F5B53E18C670F3F9910D7A91CEFABD6CEF
F052280A3CFA69B3B549FOF2Dl16E7D1B3691EFD77F30B2AAE599095ODB20EE1CB75840F5C1732
                                                                  Hex-Dump ConveISion

                 WELFARE REFORM BUDGET IDEAS (October 29, 1998)

Help the Hardest to Employ Move Into Jobs

        There are several ways to expand the Administration's efforts to help those who may face
greater challenges to making a successful transition from welfare to work, including people with
low basic skills, substance abuse problems, and disabilities. We can address these issues both by
refocusing the $3 billion Welfare-to-Work fund and increasing resources through other funding
streams and agencies, as described below.

        In addition, in order to target resources to the hardest to employ, we may wish to amend
the $1.5 billion Welfare-to-Work program during reauthorization to direct more funds to the
highest poverty areas, increase funds for tribes, increase funding for competitive grants, and
encourage assistance for two-parent families (many of whom face issues related to literacy,
substance abuse and disabilities). We are also exploring whether in the TANF program we
could offer additional incentives to the states to invest more of these funds in innovative,
work-focused efforts to help those with substance abuse, low literacy, and disabilities make a
successful transition from welfare to work.

Increase Employment Opportunities for Individuals with Low Literacy Levels

          Historically, individuals with low education levels have remained on welfare longer, and
there  is an increasing concentration of individuals with English language barriers on the welfare
rolls in some places.

      Set aside within WTW competitive grant funds for work-based literacy projects. (new policy,
       should not require legislation) Low education level is currently an eligibility criteria for
       WTW funds, and a few competitive grants are focusing on work-based approaches to
       increasing basic skills, for immigrants and other populations. To encourage additional
       services for individuals who need to learn English and other adults with low basic skills,
       we could direct DOL to set aside approximately $100 million of the $375 million
       competitive grant funds for work-based literacy projects.    A high priority should be
       given to projects with strong employer involvement. (Cost: None).

      Create 21st Century Workforce Education Initiative.   (new grant idea submitted by ED, not
       currently included in their FY 2000 budget proposal). Barriers preventing more adults
       from participating in Adult Education include time, the need to work, and child care and
       transportation. Providing access to services on or near the work site that complement
       work and are supported by employers would greatly assist individuals to raise their
       literacy levels and succeed in the workplace. Education has proposed grants to help
       support partnerships of business, labor, and education organizations to improve the basic
       literacy skills of current or newly hired workers to meet the demands of a global
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

         economy. These should be closely linked to the One-Stop system created under the
         Workforce Investment Act. While Adult Ed programs are not income-targeted, many of
         those with the lowest literacy levels are poor and either unemployed or working in
         low-wage, part-time jobs. Nearly half are black or Hispanic, and one-quarter are
         immigrants. Adult Ed programs typically require a 25 state match -- we may want to
         allow this match to be met by employers and/or by WTW and TANF funds. [ED is
         refining and costing out the proposal for NEC's E&T meeting on 11/6.]

        Increase funding for Adult Education, including BSL. There is evidence of large unmet need
         for adult ed services, particularly for ESL in urban areas and for basic education for
         out-of-school youth. ED has proposed a $15 million increase in Adult Ed Basic Grants
         for FY 2000, from $385 million in FY 1999 to $400 million. States provide a 25
         percent match, and decide how much of the Adult Ed funds to use for ESL. ED also
         received $7 million in FY 1999 for ESL discretionary grants, and has proposed a $20
         million expansion in FY 2000. Within the Department's proposed funding level, or with
         additional funds, ED could create incentives for states or communities to expand adult
         basic skills and ESL services to address the long-waiting lists in some areas and also to
         expand capacity of work-focused ESL. (Cost: Need 5 year cost from Ed)

    Increase Employment Opportunities for Individuals with Substance Abuse Problems

         Various estimates show at least 20 percent of welfare recipient have substance abuse
issues, and this percentage rises within those remaining on the rolls. In general, programs that
effectively integrate treatment and welfare to work efforts, and knowledge about how to do so,
are both lacking, although a handful of states have developed innovative approaches.

        Set aside within WTW competitive grants for work-focused substance abuse treatment. (new
         policy, should not require legislation) Substance abuse is one of the eligibility criteria for
         WTW funds and several competitive grants focus specifically on this issue. We could
         direct DOL to set aside approximately $100 million within the competitive grants for
         work-focused substance abuse services.      (Cost: None).

        Support employment-focused substance abuse treatment. States have flexibility within the
         SAMHSA block grant to determine which populations to serve and what kind of
         treatment models to fund. Block grant funding increased significantly in FY 1999 and
         we believe SAMHSA is proposing another significant increase in FY 2000. In order to
         encourage the development of innovative programs that effectively combine treatment and
         work, there is a need for new models, better information about promising practices, and
         better information about available resources that can be tapped to expand capacity
         (including TANF and WTW funds). SAMHSA awards targeted capacity grants to
         communities who demonstrate the need to target specific substance abuse issues. We
         could target a certain portion of these grants to communities who propose work-focused
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

        treatment models, with priority to joint applications from treatment providers and TANF
        or WTW agencies. This initiative would be accompanied by a technical assistancejbest
        practices effort for states and communities, jointly funded and managed by DOL,
        SAMHSA and ACF. We are also exploring how to focus prevention efforts on children
        in TANF families. (Cost: grants within current funding levels, $1 million for technical
        assistance) .
Increase Employment Opportunities for Individuals with Disabilities

       There are a significant number of things we can do to help people with disabilities who
are on TANF, SSI, or SSDI go to work.

      Set aside within W1W competitive grants for employment services for welfare recipients with
       disabilities. (new policy, should not require legislation) While disability is not a specific
       eligibility criteria for WTW funds, there is a close correlation with other hard-to-serve
       factors. For example, a learning disability may contribute to a poor work history or low
       education level. Several non-profit competitive grantees are focusing on this population,
       and several states have formed good partnerships between their TANF and Vocational
       Rehabilitation services. To attract additional communities and providers to develop
       innovative approaches, we could direct DOL to set aside approximately $100 million in
       competitive grants to help welfare recipients with disabilities get and keep jobs. This
       would be accompanied by an interagency technical assistance effort to improve
       coordination across agencies and programs. (Cost: None)

      New BRIDGE grant program. In March, you issued an Executive Order directing the
       federal agencies to create a coordinated and aggressive national policy to increaR employment
       of adults with disabilities. The "Building Resources for Individuals with Disabilities to Gain
       Employment" ("BRIDGE") program is one of several new proposals to grow out of this
       effort. BRIDGE is a competitive grant program designed to incre.se the employment rate of
       adults with disabilities by fostering integration at the local level of employmernrelated services
       and support services to adults with disabilities. (Cost: $750 million over 5 years)

      Information and Communication Technologies for PeopJe with Disabilities. NEC has developed
       draft proposals now being vetted to ensure that new technologies will be designed from the
       beginning to be accessible to people with disabilities. Ideas include leveraging federal
       government procurement, investing in R&D, funding industry consortia, training the next
       generation of engineers (NEC will provide a more detailed write up.)

      Expanding the Defense Department's "CAP" program The Defense Department's Computer
       Accommodations Program ("CAP") purchases equipment for DOD employees with disabilities
       to allows them to keep working if they become disabled, or for new employees just joining the
       workforce. By using a central $2 million und for such purchases, individual offices do not
       have to bear the cost within their own budgets, and are less likely to be deterred from hiring a
       person with a disability. Making this program available to other agencies has the strong
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


            support of the Administration's appointees with disabilities, in particular for Tony Coelho,
            chair of the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities. (Cost $H$25
            million over five years).

          Kennedy-Jeffords/Employment-Related Tax Credit. In addition, the
           Kennedy-Jeffords legislation, described in the health section, will playa critical role
           increasing access to health care for people with disabilities returning to work.
     Helping New Workers Succeed in the Workforce

     Skill Upgrading for Entry Level Workers

             As part of it's FY 2000 budget request, DOL has proposed amending WTW to allow up to
     one-third of the WTW funds ($500 million ofthe $1.5 billion) to be used to upgrade the skills of
     entry level workers. Eligible individuals would include former welfare recipients and other low
     income individuals who qualify for the EITC, with priority given to certain non-custodial
     parents. This initiative would be permissive rather than mandatory -- states could opt to use a
     portion oftheir formula grant for this expanded purpose and population. Employers would be
     required to match the federal contribution and commit to hire former welfare recipients for the
     positions vacated by the upgraded employees. DOL's proposal would provide access to
     upgrade training to a broader range of entry level workers, not just those .who have been on
     welfare. DOL is currently refining the proposal, but one option is to use $250 million to help
     low income/entry level workers upgrade skills so they can move up the career ladder and increase
     their earnings, and target the other $250 million for a broader responsible fathers initiative (see
     below).

     Expand Access to Cars for Individuals Moving from Welfare to Work

             We continue to pursue several small initiatives that would increase access to cars without
     having the federal government directly purchase cars for individuals. Possibilities include: 1)
     Donate surplus federal vehicles to welfare to work programs who could in turn lease or sell them
     to current and former welfare recipients for whom public transit is not a viable option, including
     those living in rural areas. This could be modeled after the initiative to donate federal computers
     to schools. 2) Identify a modest amount of seed money for a new national intermediary
     established to expand the number of community-based revolving loan programs for low income
     families to purchase cars ($5 " $10 million).

     Welfare to Work Tax Credits

            See Community Empowerment section.

     Connection between TANF and Unemployment Insurance.

            While there continues to be substantial interest in this issue, it is probably best considered
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


within the broader context of UI reform. DOL's FY 2000 budget has a placeholder for UI
reform, and OMB is convening a discussion on the issue later this week.

 Additional Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers.

       See Community Empowerment section.

Full Funding for Tob Access and Reverse Commute Grants.

        The Omnibus Budget Act appropriated $75 million for FY 1999 ($25 million above the
FY 1999 guaranteed funding level). TEA-21 set guaranteed funding from the Highway Trust
Fund at $60 million for FY 2000. DOT has requested $150 million in its FY 2000 budget. We
may also want to pursue a legislative change to the way funds flow to tribal areas -- currently,
states must select tribes as applicants.

Promote Responsible Fatherhood

Responsible Fatherhood Grants

         There is growing interest at all levels of government and across a broad spectrum of
society in helping fathers be responsibly involved in their children's lives through both financial
and emotional support. Increasing the employment and earnings of low income fathers will
increase the financial support they can provide for their children. This support is particularly
critical for children whose custodial parents are moving from welfare to work. These fathers are
generally motivated to work, but they tend to have intermittent, low-paying jobs. They also have
high rates of involvement with the criminal justice system. Employment efforts should therefore
focus on helping these fathers succeed and advance in the formal workforce through a
combination of retention and rapid re-employment services, and work-based skill upgrading.

        We continue to work through a number of funding and scope issues, but one option
would be to designate $250 million from the WTW funds that could be matched by TANF and
child support funds.      Funds could be allocated on a formula basis to states who submit a joint
plan from their TANF, child support, and WTW agencies. This plan would identify a local
service delivery approach that ensured involvement of appropriate local stakeholders, including
community-based organizations. While the primary focus would be employment, funds could
also be used to support parenting, peer support, mediation and other services for fathers who
were participating in work and cooperating with child support. States could propose innovative
modifications to the child support system to remove barriers preventing the system from working
appropriately for this population. We might also consider expanding funding for Access and
Visitation grants for fathers who are 'playing by the rules', i.e. paying their child support
obligations and participating in activities to increase their employment. For equity reasons, it
may be appropriate to allow some level of service to any low income father who is supporting
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


his children (whether living with them or not), but the primary focus could be non-custodial
fathers (or parents) whose children are current or former TANF recipients.

        Congressman Shaw is expected to reintroduce his Fathers Count block grant proposal
next session and this grant proposal could be a basis for developing a bipartisan initiative. He
proposed $2 billion over 5 years, beginning with $200 million in Year 1, growing $100 million
per year to $500 million in Year 5.

         Other options for expanding the federal focus on low income fathers include: requlOng
states to serve a certain proportion of fathers in their formula grant programs or designating a
competitive grant set-aside. We could also broaden WTW eligibility criteria to include any
non-custodial parent of a child on welfare who needs employment assistance in order to meet
their child support responsibilities (currently, the father needs to meet the W1W hard-to-serve
criteria).

        Any fathers initiative should be accompanied by a strong interagency technical assistance
and evaluation component since this is a relatively new field. We could direct HHS and DOL
to identify existing resources, or request approximately $5 million in FY 2000 funding, for: a
how-to guidebook that compiles lessons from past programs, promising practices, and resource
information; electronic clearing house with links to research, existing programs, and resources
with an interactive forum .for information; and an 800 number communities can call for
information. It may also be appropriate for DOJ and HUD to participate.

Child Support Law Enforcement Initiative

        This initiative will increase the prosecution of egregious child support violators by
establishing multi-agency investigative teams to identify, analyze, and investigate cases for
prosecution. This investigative effort will result in more cases being referred to the U.S.
Attorney offices ready to prosecute. HHS's Office of Child Support Enforcement, Office of the
Inspector General, and Office of Investigations, working with state and local law enforcement and
child support agencies, have already launched a pilot project in Columbus Ohio, which will
cover 5 states (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, and Ohio). This proposal would put
these units in place all across the nation within the next several years. Additionally, it would
provide paralegals dedicated to child support cases to the 83 U.S. Attorneys offices that do not
now have them. In July, you signed into law the Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, creating
two new categories of felonies for the most egregious child support evaders. (Cost: about $10
million over 5 years).
                                                                    He.x-Dump Conversion

                       Tobacco Budget Provisions (October 29,1998)


Overview

Our FY 2000 budget should be part of a multi-pronged effort to reduce teen tobacco use,
involving possible settlements and executive actions. In this effort, we should maintain our
commitment to comprehensive tobacco legislation while moving forward incrementally when we
can. We should simplify our proposal where possible and combine it with more popular
initiatives (tax cuts, law enforcement, health care).

The budget could contain a tobacco price increase devoted to the following five purposes:

       1) Anti-drug and anti-tobacco counteradvertising and public education campaigns;
       2) Health care, including smoking cessation, drug treatment, long-term care tax credit,
       and Medicare;
       3) Scientific research at the National Institutes of Health;
       4) Law enforcement efforts to crack down on illegal drugs and underage tobacco use and
       to prevent smuggling and drug trafficking; and
       5) Assistance to tobacco farmers and their families.

In addition, the budget could include a provision waiving federal Medicaid recoupment allowing
states to keep their share of state settlement funds if they commit to spend the half of the
proceeds on a menu of programs (child care, child welfare, the maternal and child health block
grant, the substance abuse block grant, the safe and drug free schools program, Eisenhower
education grants, and the state match for the children's health insurance program), perhaps
requiring, as the Kerry-Bond amendment did, that half the restricted funds be used for child care.


We could also include personal responsibility provisions, requiring states that accept these funds
to make minors complete an anti-smoking, anti-drug, and anti-alcohol class prior to receiving a
driver's license and suspend minors' licenses ifthey are found possessing, purchasing, or
attempting to purchase drugs, alcohol, or tobacco.

In the process of pushing for comprehensive legislation, we should engage new groups of
potential supporters, including: 1) the elderly and disabled organizations that support long-term
care tax credits and Medicare solvency; 2) the pharmaceutical companies which produce
smoking cessation products; 3) the American Medical Association and other health professional
organizations.

Emphasizing the health aspects of the tobacco bill could help us gain public support. Polls
conducted in late June found 61 percent of people said cigarette prices should be raised as a
public health effort to provide billions of dollars to the public health system in return for the
medical costs caused by smoking, while only 44 percent said they should be raised because this is
the one of the best ways to cut down on teenage smoking.
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

Anti-Drug and Anti-Tobacco Counteradvertising and Public Education

We should propose to fund a national tobacco counteradvertising campaign like that currently
underway for drugs that would develop new ads and purchase enough media time to reach teens
several times a week. This media campaign should be coupled with coordinated state,
community, and school-based anti-tobacco education and prevention efforts. (Cost: $2.5 - $5.0
billion over 5 years)

This effort will include HHS's plans to make tobacco industry documents more accessible, as
outlined in the President's July 1998 directive (Cost: to be determined) and expand the National
Survey on Drug Abuse to collect improved data on teen tobacco use, including brand-specific
data, as outlined in the President's June 1998 directive. (Cost: approximately $20 million over 5
years).

Health Care

Tobacco Cessation. Each year, 20 million smokers attempt to quit, but only 1 million, or 5
percent, succeed. More than 90 percent smokers who attempt to quit do so on their own, and the
vast majority fail within 2 to 3 days. However, research shows that effective cessation methods
could raise success rates to 10-20 percent (over 2 million people annually). Successful smoking
cessation efforts can reduce the number of young people that take up smoking and can reduce the
health effects for children, such as asthma and SIDS, of parents smoking.

A full course of one ofthe five cessation treatments (gum, patch, nasal spray, inhaler, or pill
(Zyban costs around $200-300. However, less than half of managed care organizations
provide coverage of any AHCPR-approved therapies, and those that provide coverage may
impose cost-sharing requirements that hinder access to treatment. In fact, a study published in
September in the New England Journal of Medicine found that smokers were four times more
likely to quit if their health insurance plan paid the full rather than half the cost of smoking
cessation services.

Our priority should be to make smoking cessation products fully available to individuals
receiving health care through federally funded health programs (Medicaid, Medicare, community
health centers, FEHBP, DOD, and Veterans health):

        New Department of Defense anti-tobacco plan. This comprehensive anti-tobacco
       plan to increase military readiness will likely include covering over-the-counter nicotine
       replacement therapies under military health care coverage as part of a comprehensive
       military-wide anti-tobacco plan. (Cost: $300 million over 5 years)

        Veterans. We should re-propose the plan from the President's 1999 budget which
       created a new discretionary program open to all veterans who began using tobacco
       products while in the service, regardless oftheir eligibility for other VA health care
       services (currently less than 15 percent of veterans receive their health care through the
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

       VA system because of statutory limits --veterans must be low income or have a
       service-related injury.) Thirty-six percent ofthe 25 million veterans in this country
       smoke. (Cost: $435 million over 5 years).

        Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. We could require enhanced coverage
       of smoking cessation services, either by raising cover.age limits (now only $100 for most
       fee for service plans) or waiving deductible and copayments. This would be done
       outside of the budget, but would have to occur in the spring as part ofOPM's annual
       letter to contracting plans, establishing the terms for the following year of coverage.
       (Cost: None)

        Medicare. Any Medicare prescription drug plan (see health proposals) would provide
       prescription cessation products.

        Medicaid coverage. Currently, smoking cessation prescription and non-prescription
       drugs are optional state benefits under the Medicaid statute. We could propose to require
       states to cover cessation, as the McCain bill did. Alternatively, we could propose an
       enhanced 90 percent federal matching rate for smoking cessation treatments, as the
       Hansen-Meehan bill did. (Cost $110-120 million over 5 years)

        Health Clinics and Community Health Centers.     Funding should be provided to ensure
       cessation products and services are available to patients in community health centers,
       migrant health centers, and state health department clinics (Cost: XX)

And to encourage cessation for those with employer-based insurance:

        State Health Department Capacity. Funding should be provided for the CDC to work
       with states to develop comprehensive cessation programs (Cost: up to XX)

        Provider Training and Guidelines.Funding should be provided to the Agency for
       Health Care Policy and Research to update and further disseminate tobacco cessation
       guidelines. (Cost: up to XX)

        Anti-tobacco workplace initiatives by DOL and OPM. DOL could expand its drug-free
       workplace initiative to provide information to employers on steps they can take to reduce
       tobacco use among employees. OPM could disseminate a model workplace cessation
       program for all federal agencies. (Cost: about $100,000)

        Tax Treatment. Currently, the cost of cessation treatment cannot be claimed as a
       deductible medical expense because the IRS does not recognize smoking or tobacco
       addiction as a disease.    The IRS has indicated in written opinions that an official
       medical authority classification of smoking as a disease would allow cessation to be
       deducted. This would be done outside of the budget. (Cost: None)
                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

      Drug Treatment

      See discussion in the crime section.
      Long-Term Care Tax Credit

      See discussion in health section.

      Medicare

      In addition to the Medicare modernization options outlined in health section, we could also
      propose to dedicate tobacco funds to the Medicare trust fund, something fiscal conservatives like
      Domenici urged us to do last year.

      Scientific Research

      As noted in the health care section, your FY 1999 budget includes historic increases in the NIH
      and Congress funded the NIH at even higher levels (an historic $2 billion increase this year).
      You could either continue to fund this research at historic levels or you may wish to propose less
      to make room for other priorities (Cost: $300 million to $1 billion) .

     . Law Enforcement

      Tobacco

      Our budget should include funding for federal, state, and local law enforcement to enforce
      tobacco sales restrictions and prevent smuggling. (Cost: $1.7 - $3.5 billion over five years)




      See the crime section.

      Tobacco Farmers

      The budget should include a placeholder equal to the amount of the Ford proposal ($28.5 billion
      over 25 years). (Cost: $7-$11 billion over five years).

      Price Increase

      We have several types of price increases we could propose:

      1) Lump sum assessment, imposed on companies according to market share, combined with
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
industry-wide and company-specific lookbacks (McCain bill).

2) A per pack tax coupled with industry-wide and company-specific lookbacks.

3) A tax levied on each company based on the number of children that smoke their product.
     '",

'.

