RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-0CT-1998 14:34:09.00

SUBJECT:   new ideas/budget submission

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
10/30/98 02:34 PM ---------------------------



Nicole R. Rabner

10/29/98 08:41:46 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
cc:      Neera Tanden/WHO/EOP, Jennifer L. Klein/OPD/EOP
Subject:         new ideas/budget submission




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D8]MAIL43191630A.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504320050000010A020100000002050000008949000000020000DADEFODCCB22ABOBB38ADB
5348C4C1548D458FA16B975E1E579294A9AD791CFA77F2FC29A29E69AE49E06B4FAl12EF07EBE3
497C4F2318E2459B86CA433DD5DC630A8562A2AF05F7ACDE57AB2A3321462FF1A97A9F46294C79
A813B39DC034DD947DAD59B2318C6FBB5B2EE67FF8D1EOOB5E39899F61A51D7C03666F5CC6FD67
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


                Families Agenda for the Fiscal Year 2000 Budget

Over the last 30 years, there have been increasing pressures on the family --more dual-earner
couples, families working longer hours, all creating a squeeze that leaves parents with less and
less time with their children. At the very least, this time squeeze is a source of anxiety for
parents --at its worst, it places more children at risk. As part of the fiscal year 2000 budget, the
Clinton Administration can put forward an agenda that puts families first by helping parents as
they cope with this most important of all duties --raising their children.

Expansion of the Child Care and Development Block Grant. We propose to expand the
Child Care and Development Block Grant as previously proposed in the FY 1999 Budget. The
block grant is the primary federal child care subsidy program, helping low-income working
families struggling to pay for child care. Funds are distributed by formula to the states to
operate direct child care subsidy programs, as well as to improve the quality and availability of
care. Currently, over one million children are served by the program, leaving roughly nine
million children who are eligible but unserved. Cost: $7.5 billion over five years.

Expansion of the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit. The Child and Dependent Care Tax
Credit provides tax relieffor families who pay for the care of a child under 13 or a disabled
dependent or spouse in order to work. The credit is equal to a percentage of the taxpayer's
employment-related expenditures for child or dependent care, with the amount of the credit
depending on the taxpayer's income. As in the FY 1999 Budget, we propose increasing the
credit for families earning under $60,000, providing an additional average tax cut of$358 for
these families and eliminating income tax liability for almost all families with incomes below
200% of poverty ($35,000 for a family of four) who take the maximum allowable child care
expenses under the law. Cost: $5.1 billion over five years to expand the credit for three
million working families.

New Parent Paid Leave Plan. Many workers who have access to unpaid (whether through the
FMLA or employer-provided leave) are unable to take it because they simply cannot afford to do
so. To address this problem, the President could propose a New Parent Paid Leave Plan to
provide eligible parents with partial wage replacement for up to six or twelve weeks following
birth or adoption. The cost of the plan will vary considerably based on the selected eligibility
criteria. One option: all new parents with median income or below (roughly $37,000/yr) who
have been in the workforce for at least one year would be eligible for a $200/week partial wage
replacement for up to four weeks (weekly figure based on average VI benefit). Eligible workers
would be required to use the federal benefit immediately following birth or adoption and before
using any employer-provided leave benefit, but could receive the benefit whether or not they
ultimately returned to work. The program would be administered through the Unemployment
Insurance System. Cost of option: very roughly, $875 million for FY 2000 (including
start-up and administrative expenses). We will have more options and better costing next
week.

FMLA Expansion to Businesses with 25 Workers. Since the Family and Medical Leave Act
was enacted in 1993, millions of Americans have taken FMLA-covered leave to care for a
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion .

newborn or adopted child, attend to their own serious health needs, or care for a seriously ill
parent, child or spouse -- without fear of losing their job or health insurance. Under current law,
workers are eligible for FMLA coverage only if they work at a busil,1ess with 50 or more
employees and if they have worked at least twelve months and 1,250 hours for the employer.
(Today, about 67 million Americans -- over half of all workers -- are covered by the FMLA.
Senator Dodd proposed lowering the threshold to businesses with 25 or more employees, and
Senator Kennedy champions a proposal to lower the threshold to 10. While the President has
consistently referenced his support for expanding the FMLA benefit, the Administration has not
formally presented a proposal in this area. We recommend advancing a specific proposal to
lower the FMLA threshold to 25 or more workers, expanding coverage for up to ten million
more American workers. No budget implications.

Parent Education and Support Fund. The White House Conference on Early Childhood
Development and Leaming spotlighted the critical importance of children's earliest years of life
to their development and later success in life. Parents play the central role in providing children
with developmentally appropriate stimulation and attention during these years. In addition,
studies have revealed the promise of home-visitation programs to reduce child abuse and support
children's development. We propose the creation ofa competitive grant program administered
by HHS to fund parent education and support programs, including the development or expansion
of home visitation programs, efforts to educate and engage parents in child care and other efforts
to improve child care quality, and the establishment of "second chance maternity homes" to
support teen mothers and teach parenting skills. This fund would support programs such as
HIPPY, Parents as First Teachers, home visitation, and other parenting education programs.
Cost: $500 million over five years ..

Tax Relief for Parents, Including Parents who Stay at Home. The following are a series of
proposals that would benefit families in which a parent stays at home (all estimates are rough and
preliminary). We are currently exploring a variety of iterations of each proposal, but will settle
on only one proposal. Also note that these proposals interact differently with an expanded
Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit, and therefore, the selection of one of these policies will be
informed by our decision on the DCTC. Options:

a. Expand the Child Tax Credit. The Child Tax Credit is currently $500 per child for children
under 17. Wepropose to double the credit to $1,000 per child for those children under the age
of four. The Child Tax Credit begins to fade out for taxpayers whose adjusted gross income
exceeds $110,000 each year ($75,000 if not married). Cost: Roughly $11 to $13 billion over 5
years. Another option is to double the credit for families with children under the age of two,
which would cost roughly $4 billion over five years.

b. Increase the Standard Deduction. Most lower-income families (incomes ofless than $50,000)
do not itemize their deductions, choosing to take the standard deduction (and using the simpler
form) instead, while most higher income families choose to itemize. Therefore, a proposal to
expand the standard deduction for children would help lower-income families. Currently, the
standard deduction is roughly $7,200 for married couples, and $6,350 for heads of households.
We could increase the standard deduction by $1,000 for families with children for each child
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


under 3, regardless of the marital status of the parents, and would cover roughly 3 million
taxpayers (three quarters of whom are married couples) and 3 million children. The average
benefit would be $170 per taxpayer. Cost: $2.5 to $3.5 billion over five years. We are
currently exploring a variety of other options, including a proposal to expand the standard
deduction by $2,000 per family.

c. Expand the DCTC. We could extend the benefits of our DCTC proposal to stay-at-home
parents with children age three and under, by applying the same eligibility guidelines and
assuming minimum child-care expenses of $150 per family per month. This proposal would
also phase out the credit for families with annual income over $105,000. Cost: A variant of
this proposal was estimated at roughly $13 billion over 5 years ($8 billion above our DCTC
proposal).

Expansion of After-School Programs. An estimated five million school-age children spend
time as "latchkey kids" without adult supervision during a typical week. Research indicates that
during these unsupervised hours children are more likely to engage in at-risk behavior, such as
crime, drugs, and alcohol use. To meet this pressing demand, the President can propose a
dramatic expansion of after-school care. Areas of expansion:

a. 21st Century Learning Centers:. The program increases the supply of after-school care in a
cost-effective manner primarily by funding programs that use public schools and their existing
resources, such as computers, gymnasiums, and sports equipment. We should build on the
success of our recent expansion of the program by increasing funding by $500 million this year.
Cost: $700 million for FY 2000. [Part of these funds would be used for summer-school
programs for school districts that end social promotion.]

b. Supporting community-based after-school programs. Because so many of the most effective
after-school programs are community based, such as the Boys and Girls Clubs, we propose
expanding the Department of Justice's At-Risk Youth Initiative. We propose expanding the
program by $50 million, but targeting the funds for after-school initiatives by community-based
organizations. Cost: $250 million over five years.

c. Expanding AmeriCorps' support for after-school. An expanded AmeriCorps could increase
the availability of after school and summer programming for children and youth while providing
additional opportunities for young adults to eam money for college through service.
AmeriCorps Members serve with many ofthe major community-based organizations that provide
after school care (including YMCA, Save the Children, and Boys and Girls Clubs); many others
serve in public schools. We propose supporting a targeted initiative in which ten thousand
AmeriCorps Members would conduct a 10-week summer program involving up to 100,000
middle-school children. Cost: Roughly $35 to $40 million per year, or a cost of $200 million
over five years.

Child Welfare: Children "Aging Out" of Foster Care. Each year, nearly 20,000 18-year-olds
"age out" ofthe public child welfare system. These young adults entered foster care due to
abuse and neglect, were unable to return to their birth families, and were not adopted. Federal
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

financial support for these young people ends just at the time they are making the critical
transition to adulthood. Research shows that they face unstable housing and homelessness, low
educational achievement, depression, poor health, and violence and incarceration. When they
tum 18, they also very often find themselves with no health insurance, as Medicaid eligibility
ends at age 18. Areas for increased investment:

a. Expand the Independent Living Program. Administered by HHS, the Independent Living
Program provides services to foster care children aged 16 to 18 to help them (1) make the
transition to independence by earning a high school diploma; (2) receive vocational training; and
(3) learn daily living skills such as budgeting, locating housing, planning a career, and finding a
job. Begun in 1986, the program assists 85,000 young people and has been funded at $70
million since 1992. We recommend increasing the Independent Living Program by 50
percent -- to $105 million in FY 2000 and $525 over five years.

b. Expand the Transitional Living Program. The Transitional Living Program is an
HHS-administered, $15 million competitive grant program that funds community-based
organizations that provide services to this popUlation, including housing support. We
recommend doubling the increasing to $30 million in FY 2000 and $75 million over five years.


c. Provide Medicaid Coverage. We recommend giving states the option of using Federal
Medicaid dollars to provide health care coverage for this population -- cost TBD; roughly
hundreds of millions over 5 years).

Child Welfare: Adoption Registry. In 1996, the President called for a plan to double to
number of children adopted each year from the foster care system. Adoption 2002 -- the
initiative developed by HHS in response to President's charge -- included efforts to break down
barriers to adoption. The Administration secured $10 million in FY 1999 for HHS discretionary
Adoption Opportunities Grants for this purpose. One use of this grants will be the creation of an
Internet-based adoption registry of foster care children waiting to be adopted, so that prospective
adoptive parents can learn about these waiting children. We recommend increasing the
Adoption Opportunities grants by 20 percent to $12 million for FY 2000 and$60 million
over five years, targeted to the upkeep of this Internet-based national adoption registry.

Child Welfare: Court Improvement. The Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997, aimed at
moving children in foster care more quickly to adoptive and other permanent homes, shortened
the timeframes in which permanency decisions must be made for children in foster care. This
has put more pressure on an already over-burdened and resource-deficient family and juvenile
court system. Courts particularly need additional support to improve automation and computer
systems to track foster care children and to reduce the pending backlogs of abuse and neglect
cases. In addition, the Court Appointed Special Advocate program, which pairs a trained
volunteer with child abuse cases to serve in an advocacy role, needs to be expanded to
under-served areas. We recommend the creation of a new DOJ -administered grant program to
automate the data collection and tracking of proceedings in abuse and neglect courts and a
one-time grant to expand CAS A to under-served areas. Cost: TBD, roughly 15 million for FY
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
         2000 and $55 million over five years.

         [Flexible Work Hours for Families. BrucelElena: We are beginning to think through this
         proposal, and are looking for guidance as to whether we should continue to pursue it.] Options:

         a. Tax credit for businesses that provide flexible work schedules for their employees. We
         propose to offer tax credits to companies that offer a variety of family-friendly benefits, including
         flexible work hours for their employees, compressed work weeks, part-time work with benefits,
         job sharing, career sequencing, and extended parental leave. Such a tax credit would enable
         parents to spend more time with their children by providing companies, both small and medium
         sized, the ability to respond to the time crunch families are facing. In addition, it builds on our
         flex-time and family-leave proposals. Awaiting estimation by Treasury.

         b. Subsidies: We propose that the Commerce Department would make grants to states who
         would in tum provide grants to eligible businesses that provide flexible work hours for their
         employees, including flexible work hours for their employees, compressed work weeks, part-time
         work with benefits, job sharing, career sequencing, and extended parental leave. Within the
         grant-making process, priority would be given to small and medium sized businesses.
         Businesses would be required to ensure that the funds would be used to supplement and not
         supplant any ongoing efforts in this area. Very rough cost estimate: $500 million over five
         years.


