RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN=Stephen C. Warnath/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-FEB-1997 18:15:30.00

SUBJECT:   POTUS immigration Q&A

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena, there is no pure immigration question (regarding illegal or legal
immigration) that is likely to be raised in a Presidential press
conference right now.  I think the press is interested in other issues and
certainly there is no big event in the last week or pending legislation
that would prompt a question. I would only anticipate that legal
immigrants might come up in the context of a welfare reform question.   I
spoke with Diana and she is pulling together something on that.  Let me
know if you think there might be something else that needs to be produced.

You supported a moderate cut in legal immigration levels in Congress last
year -- will you support cuts in legal immigration levels again in this
Congress?

Republican Congressional leaders (e.g. Majority Leader Lott and Senator
Abraham, the new chair of the Senate immigration subcommittee) have made
it clear that they do not intend to consider such cuts this year.

At the same time, we think that the legal immigration system can work
better and can be made more responsive to the people who use it -- and we
will take steps, including working with Congress, to achieve these
improvements.

You ordered the release from detention of the Chinese migrants who were
smuggled on the Golden Venture? Why?

The Administration's policy of detaining smuggled aliens has deterred
smuggling by organized criminal syndicates, resulting in a sharp decrease
in the number of alien smuggling vessels that have reached u.S. shores.
Moreover, the newly enacted immigration bill's provisions that permit the
expeditious exclusion of smuggled aliens has significantly strengthened
our ability to deter alien smuggling. Under these circumstances, and
weighed against the exceptional and unusual length of detention of the
remaining 53 Golden Venture migrants, the Administration concluded that
their parole from detention is appropriate. They remain in immigration
proceedings and will be subject to the determinations of the immigration
courts.


