RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-NOV-1998 14:30:28.00

SUBJECT:   Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is draft paper on tomorrow's event. The one outstanding question
we are hoping to get guidance on is the extent to which we can say that we
hope voters elect Congress that will pass patients' bill of rights (have
call into counsel's office)

sb

'==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D91]MAIL44170640V.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S0438A060000010A02010000000205000000CE2B000000020000C6FAF869F715223F2272D6
OC85D4891B0899A49036F996FOEOBD01A9F17DBDA146BSC5938320DD1A36F2277BDA19F54D1883
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

   P RESIDENT CLINTON RELEASES REPORT DOCUMENTING ACTIONS FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS TAKING TO IMPLEMENT PATIENT' BILL OF RIGHTS AND CRITICIZES
  REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP FOR THWARTING EFFORTS TO PASS LEGISLATION TO
               ASSURE PROTECTIONS FOR ALL HEALTH PLANS
                             November 2,1998

Today, President Clinton urged voters to send back a Congress that shares his commitment to passing a
strong enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights next year. The President also emphasized that while the
Republican Leadership stalled on the patients' bill of rights, the Administration has been doing everything
possible to implement these protections in Federal health plans. To that end, he unveiled a report from the
Vice President documenting action that the Federal government is taking within its authority to implement
the Patients' Bill of Rights in the health plans it administers or oversees. Today, the President:

Criticized Republican Leadership for Allowing Congress to Adjourn Without Passing a Strong
Patients' Bill of Rights. For a full year, the President has been calling on the Congress to pass a strong
enforceable patients' bill of rights. For months, the Republican Leadership used every possible stall tactic to
thwart the patients' bill of rights. When the Republican Leadership finally did introduce a bill, their
proposal contained more loopholes than patient protections. It did not contain critical protections such as
access to specialists and offered false promises such as an appeals process that left the decisions in the hands
of HMO accountants. In fact, Senator Lott would not even allow an up or down vote to be held on this
issue.

Urges Voters to Choose A Congress Committed to Passing A Strong Enforceable Patients' Bill of
Rights. President Clinton restated his strong commitment to passing a patients' of rights in the next
Congress and urged Americans to go to the polls tomorrow to elect a Congress that shares this commitment.
This legislation should include enforceable patient protections, such as access to specialists, coverage of
emergency room services when and where the need arises, continuity of care protections, an internal and
independent external appeals process to appeal decisions made by HMO accountants, and protections to
assure that HMOs are held accountable when patients are harmed or injured due to a health plans' decisions.

Released Report From the Vice President That Highlights That While the Republican Leadership
Delayed, the Administration Is Doing Everything Possible to Implement Patient Protections. In
February, the President directed Medicare, Medicaid, the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program, the
Department of Defense Military Health Program, and the Veteran's Health Program -- which serve over 85
million Americans -- to, where possible, come into compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights outlined by
the President's Quality Commission. Today, the Vice President released a report highlighting that these
agencies have taken all the action within their statutory authority to implement patient protections. As a
result, the Federal health plans are now, or soon will be, in virtual compliance with the Patients' Bill of
Rights. The report documents that:

      The 285 participating health plans, covering nine million Federal employees and their
       dependents, have been directed to implement new patient protections this year. OPM which
       oversees the Federal Health Employees Benefits Program (FEHBP) serving nine million Federal
       employees and dependents, has directed their 285 participating health plans to come into compliance
       with the patients' bill of rights. Through their annual call letter, OPM has specifically requested that
       plans implement new protections including access to specialists, continuity of care, disclosure of
       financial incentives, and access to emergency room services. Finally, OPM has issue new
       regulations to prevent "gag clauses." OPM is also sending information to beneficiaries to assure they
       are fully aware oftheir new patient protections.
          The 39 million Medicare beneficiaries are benefitting from critical patient protections.
           Building on Medicare's commitment to providing essential patient protections, HUS published
           an Interim Final rule, in June, that includes a series of new patient protections for Medicare
           beneficiaries. When this rule is fully implemented, Medicare will be virtually in compliance
           with the Patients' Bill of Rights including new protections such as access to emergency services
           when and where the need arises, patient participation in treatment decisions, and access to specialists.

          The 38 million Medicaid beneficiaries are being assured essential protections in the Patients'
           Bill of Rights. In September, the Health Care Financing Administration published a Notice of
           Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) adding new patients protections for Medicaid beneficiaries,
           such as access to specialists and an expedited independent appeals process to bring the program
           in compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights, where possible.

          Over eight million Americans will receive the protections in the patients' bill of rights by the
           end of this year as a result of the new policy directive assured by the Defense Department's
           Military Health System (MHS). In response to the President's directive, DoD issued "The
           Patients' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities in the Military Health System," a major policy directive
           to all participants in the MHS. This directive outlined new protections for the over 8 million
           beneficiaries served by MHS, including access to appropriate specialists for women's health needs
           and chronic illnesses and rights for the full discussion of treatment options and of financial
           incentives. With this directive, which will be fully implemented by the end of this year, DoD will
           now be in compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights.

          Over three million veterans are or will soon be assured virtually all patient protections. In
           July, the Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) issued an Information Memorandum to participating
           health providers announcing its intention to have an external appeals process in place by the end of
           the year. Similarly, DV A established a task force to make recommendations as to how best
           implement information disclosure requirements consistent with Commission's recommendations and
           has developed a new brochure to provide beneficiaries the necessary information. With the
           implementation ofthese new protections DVA is virtually in compliance with the Patients' Bill of
           Rights.

          The 125 million Americans covered by ERISA still are not assured critical patient protections
           because the Department of Labor does not have the authority to implement them without
           legislation. DoL oversees the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERlSA), governing
           approximately 2.5 million private sector health plans, that cover about 125 million Americans, issued
           new regulation to implement an expedited internal appeals process and information disclosure
           requirements. However, DoL's report underscores unless Congress passes Federal legislation, they do
           not have the authority to implement most patient protections.



                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                I rex-Dump Conversion


