RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 19:26:01.00

SUBJECT:   Welfare Studies

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
CEA is working on a WEB piece summarizing the Michigan study below and a
study of San Bernadino's caseload.  I'm taking a look at both studies, but
didn't see a point in duplicating efforts by doing weekly items. Some of
the data may be relevant for our FY 2000 ideas, though the sample is
obviously limited.  The Michigan study highlights domestic violence
issue. HHS' FY 2000 budget includes a $71 million initiative to improve
and expand services for victims of domestic violence, though this is much
broader than welfare reform.
---------------------- Forwarded by Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP on 11/05/98 07:13
PM ---------------------------


Study spotlights barriers that keep women on welfare
November 4, 1998
 BY WENDY WENDLAND, Free Press Staff Writer

Women who remain on welfare are more likely to be victims of domestic
violence, suffer from clinical depression and have less than a high school
education, according to a new study from the University of Michigan.

They are slightly less likely to be dependent on alcohol, and slightly
more likely to be dependent on drugs, according to the report, "'Barriers
to the Employment of Welfare Recipients."

The U-M study is believed to be the first in the nation to ex~mine what is
keeping welfare recipients from working.  The report comes at a time when
Michigan's welfare levels are at 1971 lows, when Gov. John Engler is
advocating mandatory drug testing for welfare recipients and when the
state's main welfare-to-work strategy has been a job search and readiness
program, Work First. There were 108,144 welfare cases in August. Most
families on welfare are headed by single women.

U-M researchers say they hope their findings will be used by policy makers
in Michigan and elsewhere to adjust their plans to better reflect the
barriers facing people who remain on welfare.

"The first wave of welfare reform has been, 'Let's get people off the
rolls.' What this says is people who remain on the rolls are likely to be
those who have substantial barriers," Sheldon Danziger, U-M professor of
social work and public policy, said Tuesday. "This shows you shouldn't
assume that anybody can go out and get a job."

The report, by the university's Poverty Research and Training Center in
the School of Social Work, was based on interviews of 753 single mothers.
The Michigan women were on welfare in February 1997 and interviewed

"

    between September and December 1997. U-M officials plan to conduct
    follow-up interviews later this year and in early 2000.

    One major problem welfare recipients face is domestic violence. Research
    has shown 48 percent to 63 percent of welfare recipients suffer from
    domestic violence sometime in their lives. This can affect their ability
    to show up to work, Richard Tolman, U-M associate professor of social
    work, said Tuesday.

    The Family Independence Agency recently required all caseworkers who help
    welfare recipients find work to go through a one-day training. In
    Muskegon, the work First agency screens welfare recipients for domestic
    violence and makes referrals to a program, Every Woman's Place. The
    program is getting abqut 12 referrals a month, said executive director
    Susan Johnson. The domestic violence program includes counseling, support
    groups and shelter.
    k


