RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 17:21:55.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
11/05/98 05:21 PM ---------------------------




Sarah A. Bianchi
11/05/98 05:18:32 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D85]MAIL40787590L.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436E060000010A0201000000020500000063560000000200OOAF376ED94DDD39882B27A1
2547B42F143F12398840368454B3D5FA9073E5BF778C9569D70E8B18A80AB2925EF2EDOOA7FF90
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Public Health/Underserved Populations

     Combating Resistance to Antibiotics (Super Bug).            Recent reports have indicated that
      resistance to antibiotics is increasingly becoming a public health crisis, causing prolonged
      illnesses and even death. For example, 500,000 Americans per year are infected with Staph
      (Staphylococcus aureas), a commonly-acquired, potentially lethal, hospital-based infection.
      The bacteria now only responds to vancomycin, and CDC has recently documented the first
      cases of resistance to this last resort drug. The hospital costs alone associated with treating
      antibiotic resistance total over $600 million per year. This new initiative could address this
      critical emerging problem through: (1) a major health-warning outreach campaign involving
      hospitals, health professionals, and managed care organizations; (2) new research and
      surveillance efforts to understand where and why antibiotic resistance occurs and develop
      effective responses as well as to develop new vaccines that could help limit the occurrence
      of diseases where there is or will soon be increased antibiotic resistance; and (3)
      demonstrations that bring in a team of public health experts into a community to implement
      and test effective strategies to combat antibiotic resistance. (Cost: $25 million per year).

     Assuring Ability to Detect and Manage Bioterrorism. Bioterrorism is becoming an
      increasing threat that has the potential to injure or kill millions of Americans through deadly
      diseases, such as anthrax. While law enforcement and intelligence agencies seek to thwart
      these kinds of attacks, when prevention fails, we need a system in place that is prepared to
      manage and minimize the public health consequences. Unfortunately, unlike many types of
      attacks, bioterrorist threats could go for days or even weeks without being detected as they
      could be noticed only when clusters of deaths or a series of illnesses begin to emerge.
      Therefore, it is critical that the nation's public health system is equipped to both detect and
      respond to this potential problem. This initiative would: train epidemic intelligence officers
      who can coordinate with state health departments and other intelligence officers to identify
      and respond to attacks; develop a Metropolitan Medical Response System, a mass casualty
      emergency response system, that includes primary care, emergency transportation, and
      decontamination abilities that will be critical to save lives in the event of an attack; create
      and maintain a stockpile of pharmaceuticals, that would be critical in the event of a
      bioterrorist attack that could expose hundreds of thousands of Americans to a disease
      (current stockpiles, that contain many inactive antibiotics, are inadequate to address a major
      outbreak); and improve research to develop new vaccines and antibiotics that could be used
      in the event of an attack. (Cost: $100 to $300 million per year).

     Announcing a New Initiative to Prevent and Treat Asthma. Over the past 15 years,
      there has yet to be a fully understood and greatly concerning increase in the number of
      children afflicted with asthma. In fact, cases have doubled to total about 15 million,
      with the increase in rates highest in children under 5 years old. This disease is one of
      the leading causes of school absenteeism, accounting for over 10 million missed school
      days. Recently, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute developed new treatment
      guidelines designed for health care providers and patients with asthma. These
      guidelines demonstrate that appropriate medical care, along with measures to control
      allergens and other environmental triggers, can tremendously reduce the frequency
      and severity of attacks. The proposed initiative is designed to broadly disseminate
    coalitions will then work with schools, child care organizations, businesses, and other
    community organizations to reduce harmful exposures to asthma patients and make it
    easier for asthma patients to follow their treatment plans. This initiative would
    complement our current efforts to identify and enroll eligible children in Medicaid and
    the new Children's Health Insurance Program. (Cost: $50 million).

   Launching New Initiative to Improve Awareness and Treatment for People With
    Mental Illness. Mrs. Gore's office is recommending a White House Conference on Mental
    Health for this spring to raise awareness about mental illness and to take the next steps to
    improving access to and treatment of mental health. In addition, next year, HHS will
    release a historic Surgeon General's report documenting the widespread incidence and
    impact of mental illness. To bolster these activities, the Vice President's office would like
    to unveil a series of public-private initiatives to further improve access to prevention and
    treatment and to raise awareness about mental health, including involving foundations,
    businesses, and states in new partnerships to highlight and build on cost effective coverage
    and delivery practices; and improving the delivery of mental health services in Federal
    health programs. We believe this initiative should also include increases in the mental.
    health block grant which enabies states to provide critical mental health services, including
    assuring homeless shelters identify and treat mental illnesses, improving the availability of
    state-of-the-art treatments, and providing new incentives to communities who have
    implemented effective mental health programs, including homeless programs that effectively
    address mental illness. (Cost: Up to $100 million per year).

    Applying Effective Prevention Strategies to Combat Heart Disease, the Nation's
     Leading Killer. While diseases, such as cancer and HIV/ AIDS receive far more media
     attention, heart disease is the leading killer of women and men across nearly all racial and
     ethnic groups. More than 960,000 Americans die of heart disease each year, accounting for
     more than 40 percent of all deaths, and 58 million Americans live with some form ofthis
     disease. This disease can be markedly reduced by: preventing smoking which causes
     one-fifth of all cardiovascular deaths; improving physical activity, as Americans who are not
     physically active are at twice the risk of heart disease; and improving nutrition. We are
    .taking new strides in research in this area, and NIH recently launched one ofthe largest
     clinical prevention trials, that is examining heart disease among postmenopausal women,
     including the role of nutrition, increased exercise and physical activity. This initiative could
     also emphasize: launching a new partnership with aging networks to evaluate and improve
     nutrition in pUblic-private programs; measuring successful community prevention
     approaches and replicating them nationwide; and creating a network of, educators, churches,
     minority-based organizations to launch nationwide awareness campaign about prevention.
     (Cost: $20 million per year supplemented by NIH funding in this area).



                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex.Dump Conversion
    systems is critical for residents in rural and frontier areas. Because of the high rates
    of occupational injury associated with employment unique to rural areas, such as
    farming, mining, and fishing, rural residents experience disproportionate rates of
    trauma and medical emergencies. Although farmers constitute only 4 percent of u.S.
    workers, 38 percent of all machinery related deaths occur on farms. In addition, the
    death rate from accidental injuries in most rural areas is over twice the rate for the
    largest city. Long distances between hospitals, tertiary care centers, and other
    providers can increase the morbidity and mortality associated with medical
    emergencies. Financing modern emergency care systems in small rural communities
    is difficult at best. Many rural and frontier communities face challenges in obtaining
    ambulance equipment and communication systems and recruiting, training, and
    retaining EMS personnel. This proposal would provide funds to States and local
    communities to improve access to 911 services or alternative systems where the 911
    option is not economically viable. It would also develop and fund programs to help
    rural communities train local citizens in CPR and first responder techniques, help
    recruit and retain EMS personnel, and develop distance learning programs for EMS
    staff in order to ensure they receive appropriate training and support. (Cost: $50
    million).

   Investing in Promising Biomedical Research. We are now poised to make
    revolutionary advances that could dramatically alter and improve the way we treat
    diseases. To help realize these new possibilities, the President's FYl999 budget included a
    historic multi-year investment in biomedical research and Congress funded NIH at even
    higher levels (a $2 billion increase this year). However, there is no evidence that the
    Republicans in Congress have any intention of altering their longstanding commitment to
    outbid us on NIH funding. It appears futile to compete with them while still maintaining
    our own commitment in other priority areas. Moreover, even NIH is beginning to get a
    level of scrutiny about their ability to wisely and appropriately spend such large increases.
    Having said this, the research issue has captured the imagination of virtually every
    community, and the President and Vice President have both spoken at great detail about the
    importance of this type of investment. Therefore, it seems ill-advised not to continue some
    level of increased commitment. We recommend somewhere between $500 million and $1
    billion, although the higher amount is only conceivable assuming we use at least some
    tobacco dollars in this area.

   Improving Access to Promising HIV/AIDS Drugs. With progress in lifesaving
    HlVI AIDS therapies, the AIDS community has made it a top priority to extend these
    state-of-the-art treatments to Americans in need. While we have supported healthy
    increases in these areas, in some states, such as Texas and North Carolina, there are up to
    year-long waiting periods to get on these drugs, and other states have chosen to limit their
    programs so they do not pay for the comprehensive range of drugs needed to effectively treat
    HlV. Therefore, we are recommending new investments in the AIDS Drugs Assistance
    Program (ADAP) which helps people pay for these costly therapies that can run as high as
    $15,000 per year. In addition, we believe we should propose new increases in prevention

                                                               Automated Records Management Syste,
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion



   Continuing the President's Successful Race and Health Initiative. Minorities suffer as
    much as five times the rate for certain diseases and mortality rates, such as cancer, diabetes,
    heart disease, immunizations, HIV/AIDS, and infant mortality. In fact, infant mortality rates
    are 21/2 times higher for Mrican-Americans and P/2 times higher for Native Americans, and
    Mrican-American men under 65 suffer from prostate cancer at nearly twice the rate of
    whites. The President's race and health initiative, designed to eliminate the startling racial
    health disparities in these six critical health areas has been extremely well received by the
    minority and public health communities. When launching this program last year, we
    committed to investing $400 million over five years, and this budget should include no less
    than the $80 million promised for each year. This initiative could fund: (1) new incentives
    to public health programs to target disparities, including creating incentives for communities
    to develop effective private-public cardiovascular outreach campaigns and developing new
    networks with managed care, minority-based organizations through the National Diabetes
    Education Program to implement treatment guidelines, (2) a $30 million grant program to
    test innovative community approaches to addressing these disparities and replicating these
    programs nationwide; and (3) investments to build on this year's historic prevention and
    treatment efforts to address the ongoing health crisis ofHIV/AIDS in the minority
    community. These investments could be supplemented by new efforts at NllI to better
    understand these disparities and develop new approaches to disseminate the most up-to-date
    information. (Cost: $120 million - $150 million per year).

   Enhancing Drug Approvals, Food Safety, and other FDA priorities. The FDA has
    unprecedented new challenges, including: a surge in promising technologies and drugs that
    need approval; increasingly challenging diseases, such as AIDS arid emerging pathogens;
    important public health issues such as food and blood safety and dietary supplements; as
    well as major new statutory responsibilities from FDA reform. However, funding for this
    agency has not increased in several years. This has serious implications for the agency, as
    food inspections, organ banks, and drug companies are rarely inspected; and it is more
    challenging to meet drug approval needs. OMB and HHS have made it a high priority to
    increase funding for this agency this year, and the Vice President's office has recommended
    increases as well. We are working closely with them to determine the most advisable and
    needed funding.

   Improving Health for Medically Underserved Native Americans. Native Americans
    have disproportionately high rates of chronic and acute diseases (as much as five times
    higher diabetes rates, and three to four times the rate for SIDS). It is widely recognized that
    the illS, the main health care resource for Native Americans living on reservations, does
    not have sufficient funding to address the needs of this population, and OMB and HHS are
    proposing increases in this area. We believe that this initiative should also include an
    emphasis on health areas where there are particularly large disparities, such as
    diabetes and cancer. This would build on the President's efforts to elevate the Director of
    IHS to an Assistant Secretary position and his participation in the conference on
                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
    compliment well his race and health initiative. (Cost: working with HHS and OMB to
    determine needed increases).

   Improving Access to Emergency Room Care for Veterans. As part of the President's
    request to bring Federal health programs into compliance with the patients' bill of rights,
    there is some question as to whether the V A provides veterans adequate access to emergency
    room services. The VA currently only pays costs associated with emergency services
    provided to veterans at V A hospitals; and some argue that even though this is a
    discretionary, deliberately limited program, it is not entirely consistent with the patient
    protection to assure emergency services when and where the need arises. We expect
    Senator Daschle will offer a proposal to extend veterans' access to emergency rooms at
    non-VA facilities, and it is advisable for us to address this widely-publicized issue to some
    extent so we are not perceived as reneging on our commitment to apply the patients' bill of
    rights where we can. (Cost: VA's current proposal costs $550 million per year. However,
    OMB has been working to dramatically reduce the costs of this proposal).

   Investing in Promising DoD Breast Cancer/Prostate Cancer Research Programs. We
    have continually highlighted DoD's innovative, popular cancer research programs (most
    recently the President announced grants in the DoD prostate cancer research program in his
    Father's Day radio address). However, we have been increasingly criticized by advocates
    who question the Administration's commitment to this program because the President's
    budget has never proposed any funding for this critical program. Advocates believe that the
    lack of an Administration proposal makes it much more difficult to lobby for funding on the
    Hill. DoD is somewhat resistant to this concept as they believe that although they have
    developed a model program in response to a Congressional mandate, cancer research is not
    within their military mission. If you chose to fund this area, we would need to at least match
    FY1999 funding and potentially increase this amount.(Cost: About $250 million per year).




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex.Dwnp Conversion


