RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 13:10:16.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
tobac==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D31)MAIL46699290U.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A6030000010A02010000000205000000F031000000020000CB6AB1B6EFBBBE28C5BOD4
14CC8CED4F9B64ECAB4C74EEEE8630C449FD76DIOAC27445406C9C28AF083EC5914398EA79C787
DE78FE3FBC4C796FF4F7FF6BA853D684090AD841F43B203F71BCBDFE603687D7BOBEFBEF624DF5


Overview

Our FY 2000 budget should be part of a mUlti-pronged effort to reduce teen tobacco use,
involving possible settlements and executive actions. In this effort, we should maintain our
commitment to comprehensive tobacco legislation while moving forward incrementally when we
can. We should simplify our proposal where possible and combine it with more popular
initiatives (tax cuts, law enforcement, health care).

The budget could contain a tobacco price increase devoted to the following five purposes:

       1) Anti-drug and anti-tobacco counteradvertising and public education campaigns;
       2) Health care, including smoking cessation, drug treatment, long-term care tax credit,
       and Medicare;
       3) Scientific research at the National Institutes of Health;
       4) Law enforcement efforts to crack down on illegal drugs and underage tobacco use and
       to prevent smuggling and drug trafficking; and
       5) Assistance to tobacco farmers and their families.

In addition, the budget could include a provision waiving federal Medicaid recoupment allowing
states to keep their share of state settlement funds if they commit to spend the half of the
proceeds on a menu of programs (child care, child welfare, the maternal and child health block
grant, the substance abuse block grant, the safe and drug free schools program, Eisenhower
education grants, and the state match for the children's health insurance program), perhaps
requiring, as the Kerry-Bond amendment did, that half the restricted funds be used for child care.


We could also include personal responsibility provisions, requiring states that accept these funds
to make minors complete an anti-smoking, anti-drug, and anti-alcohol class prior to receiving a
driver's license and suspend minors' licenses if they are found possessing, purchasing, or
attempting to purchase drugs, alcohol, or tobacco.

In the process of pushing for comprehensive legislation, we should engage new groups of
potential supporters, including: 1) the elderly and disabled organizations that support long-term
care tax credits and Medicare solvency; 2) the pharmaceutical companies which produce
smoking cessation products; 3) the American Medical Association and other health professional
organizations.

Emphasizing the health aspects ofthe tobacco bill could help us gain public support. Polls
conducted in late June found 61 percent of people said cigarette prices should be raised as a
public health effort to provide billions of dollars to the public health system in return for the
medical costs caused by smoking, while only 44 percent said they should be raised because this is
the one of the best ways to cut down on teenage smoking.

                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

We should propose to fund a national tobacco counteradvertising campaign like that currently
underway for drugs that would develop new ads and purchase enough media time to reach teens
several times a week. This media campaign should be coupled with coordinated state,
community, and school-based anti-tobacco education and prevention efforts. (Cost: $2.5 - $5.0
billion over 5 years)

This effort will include HHS's plans to make tobacco industry documents more accessible, as
outlined in the President's July 1998 directive (Cost: to be determined) and expand the National
Survey on Drug Abuse to collect improved data on teen tobacco use, including brand-specific
data, as outlined in the President's June 1998 directive. (Cost: approximately $20 million over 5
years).

Health Care

Tobacco Cessation. Each year, 20 million smokers attempt to quit, but only 1 million, or 5
percent, succeed. More than 90 percent smokers who attempt to quit do so on their own, and the
vast majority fail within 2 to 3 days. However, research shows that effective cessation methods
could raise success rates to 10-20 percent (over 2 million people annually). Successful smoking
cessation efforts can reduce the number of young people that take up smoking and can reduce the
health effects for children, such as asthma and SIDS, of parents smoking.

A full course of one of the five cessation treatments (gum, patch, nasal spray, inhaler, or pill
(Zyban costs around $200-300. However, less than half of managed care organizations
provide coverage of any AHCPR-approved therapies, and those that provide coverage may
impose cost-sharing requirements that hinder access to treatment. In fact, a study published in
September in the New England Journal of Medicine found that smokers were four times more
likely to quit if their health insurance plan paid the full rather than half the cost of smoking
cessation services.

Our priority should be to make smoking cessation products fully available to individuals
receiving health care through federally funded health programs (Medicaid, Medicare, community
health centers, FEHBP, DOD, and Veterans health):

        New Department of Defense anti-tobacco plan. This comprehensive anti-tobacco
       plan to increase military readiness will likely include covering over-the-counter nicotine
       replacement therapies under military health care coverage as part of a comprehensive
       military-wide anti-tobacco plan. (Cost: $300 million over 5 years)

        Veterans. We should re-propose the plan from the President's 1999 budget which
       created a new discretionary program open to all veterans who began using tobacco
       products while in the service, regardless of their eligibility for other VA health care
       services (currently less than 15 percent of veterans receive their health care through the

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
       service-related injury.) Thirty-six percent of the 25 million veterans in this country
       smoke. (Cost: $435 million over 5 years).

        Federal Employees Health Benefit Program. We could require enhanced coverage
       of smoking cessation services, either by raising coverage limits (now only $100 for most
       fee for service plans) or waiving deductible and copayments. This would be done
       outside of the budget, but would have to occur in the spring as part ofOPM's annual
       letter to contracting plans, establishing the terms for the following year of coverage.
       (Cost: None)

        Medicare.   Any Medicare prescription drug plan (see health proposals) would provide
       prescription cessation products.

        Medicaid coverage. Currently, smoking cessation prescription and non-prescription
       drugs are optional state benefits under the Medicaid statute. We could propose to require
       states to cover cessation, as the McCain bill did. Alternatively, we could propose an
       enhanced 90 percent federal matching rate for smoking cessation treatments, as the
       Hansen-Meehan bill did. (Cost $110-120 million over 5 years)

        Health Clinics and Community Health Centers.      Funding should be provided to ensure
       cessation products and services are available to patients in community health centers,
       migrant health centers, and state health department clinics (Cost: XX)

And to encourage cessation for those with employer-based insurance:

        State Health Department Capacity. Funding should be provided for the CDC to work
       with states to develop comprehensive cessation programs (Cost: up to XX)

        Provider Training and Guidelines.Funding should be provided to the Agency for
       Health Care Policy and Research to update and further disseminate tobacco cessation
       guidelines. (Cost: up to XX)

        Anti-tobacco workplace initiatives by DOL and OPM. DOL could expand its drug-free
       workplace initiative to provide information to employers on steps they can take to reduce
       tobacco use among employees. OPM could disseminate a model workplace cessation
       program for all federal agencies. (Cost: about $100,000)

        Tax Treatment. Currently, the cost of cessation treatment cannot be claimed as a
       deductible medical expense because the IRS does not recognize smoking or tobacco
       addiction as a disease.    The IRS has indicated in written opinions that an official
       medical authority classification of smoking as a disease would allow cessation to be
       deducted. This would be done outside of the budget. (Cost: None)

                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

See discussion in the crime section.
Long-Term Care Tax Credit

See discussion in health section.

Medicare

In addition to the Medicare modernization options outlined in health section, we could also
propose to dedicate tobacco funds to the Medicare trust fund, something fiscal conservatives like
Domenici urged us to do last year.

Scientific Research

As noted in the health care section, your FY 1999 budget includes historic increases in the NIH
and Congress funded the NIH at even higher levels (an historic $2 billion increase this year).
You could either continue to fund this research at historic levels or you may wish to propose less
to make room for other priorities (Cost: $300 million to $1 billion).

Law Enforcement

Tobacco

Our budget should include funding for federal, state, and local law enforcement to enforce
tobacco sales restrictions and prevent smuggling. (Cost: $1.7 - $3.5 billion over five years)




See the crime section.

Tobacco Farmers

The budget should include a placeholder equal to the amount of the Ford proposal ($28.5 billion,.
over 25 years). (Cost: $7-$11 billion over five years).

Price Increase

We have several types of price increases we could propose:

1) Lump sum assessment, imposed on companies according to market share, combined with


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


    industry-wide and company-specific lookbacks (McCain bill).

    2) A per pack tax coupled with industry-wide and company-specific lookbacks.

    3) A tax levied on each company based on the number of children that smoke their product.




                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


