RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 12:52:43.00

SUBJECT:   New Ideas 2000

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D89]MAIL476672907.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504324070000010A020100000002050000004BB8010000020000FAED7AEC1A9EF6EF4EFFDB
5DA66CAOCD8FA9B8DBFC84120BD542D901C07EOF8013751151B8911BB833A8EA85C22AAAOEEBEF
FD24EE584AA200DE2EEB69E7AD139F51D153871D3DF49BF40D105A8659ABB463A774A1AEFA15D1
OA678B664E5EA05F9B32A03774DE7FCF483674480837951496B94F1627835FD089D4135C273999
7AB7CD267FF6B7BC74122E4E8A7358C4F48BC34F3C761568779008DB296DBCA2551052A50395D4
5CD4015B17A508BD06DC7135D1F61D3F02F92E01AC81DC7CA71FAFB4A2A98888E90BCFOA75243D
                                                                 Hex.Dump Conversion
CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM INITIATIVES

1. Reaffirm Support For McCain-Feingold. Challenge to the new Congress to pass this legislation by
the Spring.


CIVIL RIGHTS INITIATIVES

1. Enhance the Community Relations Service program at Justice. (part existing program to be
enhanced; part new policy). Since 1964, CRS has contributed significantly to community stability through
the effective resolution of thousands of racial and ethnic community conflicts. Since the 1980s, their
budget has been decimated (from a staff of over 300 to a current staff of 45). An increase in funding for
this program fits well with the President's Race Initiative. This initiative could (1) enhance CRS's current
ability to respond to racial unrest in communities (like Jasper, TX) by increasing staff (with an emphasis of
field and regional conciliators) and enhanced technology; (2) provide community mediation and conflict
resolution training to local governments, law enforcement, community groups and other stakeholders
(techniques that can be used by communities as an alternative to litigation); (3) allow the CRS to fulfill
their commitment to provide technical assistance on hate crimes to the 93 U.S. attorneys around the
country. (Cost: ??? but less than $10 million)

2. Promoting Racially Integrated Communities. Enlist private real estate industry in a national
campaign that promotes that promotes the advantages of housing integration (similar to the effort being
formed re: diversity in higher education). (no cost)

3. Civil Rights Coordination. This initiative would create an inter-agency civil rights coordinating
council to (1) improve cross agency coordination of civil rights enforcement; (2) expand and coordinate
data collection across agencies; (3) coordinate research on the extent of racial discrimination in the country
(including developing models for paired testing in emerging areas, such as employment and public
accommodations); and (4) include a linking of data bases across enforcement agencies. This is an idea put
forward last year by the civil rights agencies and this year (in a slightly modified form) by Counsel's office.
(Cost: ?? -- (probably very little, except perhaps for the data base linkage).

4. Ensuring Equal Pay. A program to be run by the EEOC and DOL to advance outreach to
businesses and employees to educate them about the legal requirements for paying equal wages,
provide technical assistance, improve training for EEOC employees and resources for increases in
enforcement capabilities. In addition, funding for research to better understand the nature and
extent of compensation discrimination. Also funding for a Women in Non-Traditional Occupations
Initiative, which will identify best practices, emphasize anti-discrimination and anti-harassment
activities, and explore incentives to improve access to and acceptance of women into glass ceiling
and nontraditional opportunities such as construction, "high tech," and manufacturing. (Cost:
$18.7 million for EEOC and $9.8 million for DOL)·.

5. Hate Crimes Legislation. We should continue to push for our hate crimes legislation.


COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT INITIATIVES

Access to Capital and Credit

1.   CDFI Tax Credit. We are looking at a proposal to extend tax incentives to encourage
stimulate the economic revitalization ofthose areas. Under the proposal, $100 million in
non-refundable tax credits would be made available to the CDFI Fund to allocate among equity
investors in qualified CDFIs between 2000 and 2009. The allocation of credits would be
determined by the CDFI Fund using a competitive process similar to the one used for grants, loans,
and equity investments. The maximum amount of credit allocable to a particular investment
would be 25 percent of the amount invested, though the CDFI Fund could negotiate a lower
percentage. One downside with this proposal is that it would not assist non-profit CDFIs nor those
that issue stock, such as mutual organizations.

2. Microcredit Initiative. We are working with an interagency team to identify means to amplify
Administration support for micro enterprise finance - both domestically and internationally. We
are examining whether to build on Senators Kennedy's and Domenici's PRIME legislation which
would provide technical assistance to micro enterprise. We are also looking at increased funding
for CDFI initiatives specifically targeted to microenterprise (both for operational and lending
purposes), and CRA and other regulatory reform designed to enhance bank lending to
micro enterprise funds. On the international side, we are looking at whether we can increase
microenterprise funding for USAID or through MDBs (either as a direct appropriation or
potentially more innovative means, e.g., "debt for development" swaps), some portions of which
may come under the aegis of support for countries hardest hit by the financial crisis.

Creating Jobs/Making Work Pay

1. Clean Water, Parks, and Communities Bends.          We are examining three potential proposals to
encourage "green" infrastructure projects. The first model uses the same financing mechanism as your
school construction proposal -- providing tax credits to state and local areas on their bond authoriy -- to
provide incentives to communities to clean up the environment. This proposal would cost about $1
billion over five years and would leverage about $4$5 billion in environmental investments. Communities
could issue these zero-interest bonds for a I1"Enu of projects: protecting and improving water quality;
cleanup of contaminated sediments; waterfront reclamation and revitalization; storm water runoff control;
purchasing of green spaces to prevent sprawl; park enhancements and revitalization, and browriHds
cleanup. The second model, which provides a smaller incentive than the first model, would create new
tax-exempt bond authority for these state and local areas to invest in clean water, parks, and communities.
The advantage of this model is that it miIds on the current system of bond finance. The final model would
allocate tax credits (like the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit) to states and local areas to provide to the
developers of these green infrastructure projects.

2. Employment Tax Credits. The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and the Welfare-To-Work
Tax Credit (WTW) encourage employers to hire and retain members of certain economically
disadvantaged targeted groups. Individuals must be certified as a member of a target group before the
employer can claim a credit. Targeted groups under WOTC include certain welfare recipients and
economically disadvantaged groups, and vocational rehabilitation referrals. The maximum credit is
$2,400. The WTW targets long-term welfare,recipients and individuals who are no longer eligible for
welfare because offederal or state time limits. The maximum credit is $8,500, if the employee stays with
the employer for two years, thus encouraging retention. The WOTe is slightly more generous for
short-term employment. Both credits will expire on June 30, 1999. Under this proposal the two credits
would be made permanent.


                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

1. Expansion of Low Income Housing Tax Credit. Last year, you proposed a 40-percent expansion
of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) to spur the private-sector to develop more affordable
rental housing for low-income Americans. However, Congress failed to act despite large bipartisan
support in both the House and the Senate. We recommend you re-propose increasing the cap on the
LIHTC from $1.25 per capita to $1.75 per capita. This proposal would restore the value of the credit to its
1986 level and will help develop an additional 150,000-180,000 affordable housing units over the next
five years. This proposal would cost $1.6 billion over five years.

2. Homeownership Tax Credit. We are examining two different types of tax credits to promote
homeownership among lower-income families, who generally do not benefit from the mortgage interest
deduction. The first proposal would use the model of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit to create a
Low-Income Homeownership Tax Credit. Under this proposal, low-income families would receive a low-
or zero-interest second mortgage, which would reduce their upfront costs (e.g., downpayment and closing
costs) and investors would receive the tax credit as their return on their investment. The second proposal
is a $5,000 tax credit for first-time homebuyers in Empowerment Zones or Enterprise Communities. (The
1997 Balanced Budget Act included a similar proposal for first-time homebuyers in the District of
Columbia.) We are analyzing both of these proposals to see which one most effectively reduces barriers
to homeownership among lower-income families, while being fiscally sound.

3. Expansion of Private Activity Bond Cap/Mortgage Revenue Bonds. Within their volume cap,
states and local government may issue tax-exempt bonds for a variety of purposes. State and local
governments use about one-third of their private activity bond allocation for mortgage revenue bonds'
(MRBs), which helps state and local areas provide below-market mortgages to first-time homebuyers with
relatively low incomes. However, the volume cap on private activity bonds, and thus MRBs, has not
changed since 1986. Most community development groups view private activity bonds as yours, since
you were the one who permanently extended it in 1993. If Congress acts this year to increase the cap --
which is likely since it is supported by a majority of both houses -- we are concerned that you may lose this
issue as one of your legacies. Therefore, we are looking to accelerate the increase in the cap that was
included in this year's budget agreement. Treasury estimates that a 50-percent increase in 2000 -- which
would restore its value to its 1986 level -- would cost $500 million over five years.

4. Incremental Tenant-based Section 8 Vouchers. In order to build on the success of securing new
incremental vouchers last year, we recommend seeking an additional 50,000 welfareto-work housing
vouchers and another 25,000 units to meet the needs of the homeless, including elderly homeless and
homeless veterans.

5. Regional Affordable Housing Initiative. We are examining whether to propose a Regional
Affordable Housing Initiative (RAHI) as a competitive pilot program. This proposal would be designed to
result in a more balanced distribution of affordable housing across participating metropolitan regions. In
particular, the program seeks to increase the availability of affordable housing in areas with high growth in
low-skilled jobs and inadequate supplies of housing for low-income workers.. This proposal could be
funded through HUD's HOME program and would cost $125 million over five years.

6. Elderly Housing Initiative. This proposal includes a three-pronged approach to tackle the needs for
elderly housing. This initiative would provide new capital to improve the quality of elderly housing, meet
the changing needs of elderly residents and provide an alternative to nursing home care -- such as assisted
living -- and provide more choice for the elderly by providing new vouchers. This initiative would cost
$600 to $700 million in FY2000.
                                                                    Automated Records Management ~y ~Lt"fJ
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

1. Consumer Bill of Rights. A consumer bill of rights to address a number of areas such as enforcement,
notice to consumers, and dissemination of information. We could announce this bill of rights as a
package, but then pull out separate pieces for separate events as with the Patients' Bill of Rights area. We
could include a number of different areas such as the following: Consumers' Bill of Rights for the 21st
Century: Bringing Basic Consumer Protections to the High-Tech Marketplace. (Cost for the entire
package: $12.5 million for the Federal Trade Commission).

        A. Consumers have a right to accurate information in the electronic marketplace. We
        have entered the Information Age, but sometimes information misleads rather than inspires
        consumers. On the Internet, many advertisements ~e confusing because important information is
        missing, hidden, or inaccurate. To fix this problem, we need to make sure that existing laws are
        in step with new technology. All agencies should review and revise their consumer disclosure
        laws to ensure that they are as effective online as they are on paper.

        B. Consumers have a right to protection from fraud in the electronic marketplace.
        Congress should extend the criminal wire fraud and mail fraud statutes to cyberspace and prohibit
        deceptive practices online. We could provide 30 additional FTEs for the Federal Trade
        Commission's Bureau of Consumer Protection to detect and enforce antifraud laws on the Internet
        and to expand consumer education efforts.

        C. Consumers have a right to control their personal information in the electronic
        marketplace. Consumers should be able to shop in cyberspace without fear of prying eyes.
        They should know if a web site wants to collect information about them, and they should have a
        choice about how that information will be used. Consumers should have access to their personal
        information to make sure it is accurate and their personal data should be kept secure. [Congress
        just passed an identity theft law.] This proposal would fund 15 FTEs to staff the FTC's Bureau of
        Consumer Protection Internet Privacy initiative.

        D. Consumers should have one place to go for help and information. Consumers should have
        a one-stop shop for their Internet fraud problems, and law enforcement should be able to respond
        to respond to reported consumer fraud quickly and effectively. The Federal Trade Commission
        already operates the Consumer Response Center, which puts mail, telephone, and Internet fraud
        complaints in one database called Consumer Sentinel. This database contains over 150,000
        complaints that are shared with officials across the U.S. and Canada. This proposal would fund a
        toll-free complaint number for the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection.

      E. Consumers have a right to protection in the global marketplace. Schemers and criminals
      hide behind borders, even as they travel through borderless cyberspace, to victimize consumers
      everywhere. In order to bring these persons to justice, we need to strengthen our extradition
      treaties and change our laws so that we can share information and increase cooperation with our
      law enforcement partners around the globe. This proposal would provide funding for the FTC's
      Bureau of Consumer Protection to develop a global version of Consumer Sentinel, train law
      enforcement personnel to use it, and bring meaningful law enforcement actions against
      international cybercrooks.
2. Slamming/Cramming. Cramming, in which con artists add bogus charges to consumers' telephone

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
another, and are the top two respective complaints reported to the National Fraud Information Center in
1998. In 1997, the FCC received more than 20,000 complaints from customers who were slammed. So
far, the FCC has fined slammers, announcing a $5.7 million fine this year, and announced voluntary
guidelines for cramming that local telephone companies say they will follow. We could add money for
enforcement to the FCC and/or DOJ. In May, the Senate overwhelming passed legislation that would
impose new penalties on slammers and would eliminate common slamming methods, such as contest entry
forms that, when signed by unsuspecting customers, authorize a switch of their long-distance carriers. We
should continue to seek this legislation.

3. Basic Banking Fee Disclosure Project -- In order to respond to the outrage consumers feel about ATM
surcharges, without supporting economically questionable regulation of ATM fees, we are developing a
proposal to make publicly available a list of fees charged by financial institutions on an individual or
geographic basis to be published periodically over the Internet. The services profiled would include, but
would not be limited to charges for access to ATMs. (Cost: $3-5 million)


CRIME INITIATIVES

Crime BiIlll

The 1994 Crime Act will expire at the end of the FY 2000 budget cycle, guaranteeing that the next
Congress will have to consider major crime legislation. In his State of the Union and FY 2000 budget--
before the Crime Act lapses and before Republicans act on their own legislation -- the President should
challenge Congress to extend his popular COPS program and pass a new crime that builds on the core
elements of the successful 1994 Crime Act -- more police, tougher punishment and better prevention.

To do this, we will need about $1.3 billion in new funds to preserve the Crime Act's current funding level
of $5.8 billion per year. Approximately $4.5 billion is already built into the FY 2000 and future budgets
for future crime bill programs (Interestingly, the only crime bill program not built into future budgets is the
President's COPS program). With this commitment of funds, we could reconstitute the same broad-based
coalition oflaw enforcement leaders, local elected officials, gun advocates and community groups that
strongly supported the 1994 Crime Act, and work with them to develop the next generation of tough, smart
anti-crime proposals. Total funding: $5.8 billion in FY 2000, $29 billion through 2004.New funding: $1.3
billion in FY 2000, $6.3 billion through 2004. Major components of this new crime bill could include:

1. $1.4 billion for Community-Oriented Policing and Prosecution Services (COPPS). With the
President's pledge to help fund 100,000 more police likely to be fulfilled before the end of next summer,
the FY 2000 budget will only include about $300 million for the COPS program. Already mayors and
police chiefs are calling for COPS to be extended, and Senate Democrats quietly proposed such an
extension in a crime bill they introduced at the end of this past Congress. We should take the lead in
proposing to extend -- and expand -- a new COPPS initiative that includes:

        A. $500 million for more police on the street. Similar to the current program, these funds
        would be used to hire, redeploy and retain an estimated 5,000 to 6,000 police each year.

        B. $400 million for a 21st Century Policing initiative. These funds would be used for police
        training, technology and equipment, including: bolstering our 35 Regional Community Policing
        Training Centers; fostering partnerships between police departments and universities (i.e., the
        partnership between the Boston Police Department and Harvard's Kennedy School); expanding

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
        York's COMPSTAT model); improving police academy instruction; promoting minority
        recruitment of police officers; and other existing programs like the Police Corps and law
        enforcement scholarships initiatives.
        C. $400 million for community prosecutors. Although Congress has been reluctant to fund our
        proposals for juvenile and community-based prosecutors, it will be much more difficult for
        Congress to oppose direct funds for prosecutors if they are linked to the popular COPS initiative.
        Thus, we should dedicate $400 million of the new COPPS initiative to hire, train and equip the
        nation's prosecutors to join their local police in fighting crime on a more pro-active basis.

        D. $100 million for community crime fighting. Lastly, a new COPPS program should set aside
        funds to engage community residents, local government agencies and the private sector in solving
        crime problems and improving the quality of life in neighborhoods. These funds could be used to
        recruit seniors to help police identifY and respond to abandoned cars, neglected properties and
        other crime-breeding conditions; to establish citizen police academies and teach neighborhood
        residents problem solving; and to enlist local environmental agencies to crackdown on illegal
        dumping in the inner city, which is often run by gangs.

2. $720 million for promoting punishment and deterrence. Rather than propose additional funding for
the punishment title of a new crime bill, we would shift the emphasis from prison construction to
promoting swifter and more certain punishment for all persons under criminal justice supervision.
Specifically, we would reallocate the Crime Acts current prison funding as follows:

        A. $150 million for criminal aliens. This simply reimburses states for the costs of incarcerating
        criminal aliens at current funding levels.

        B. $285 million for general prison construction. This represents a cut of about $210 million
        for Violent Offender Incarceration and Truth-in-Sentencing grants.

        C. $285 million for Certainty of Punishment. We envision this initiative to increase the ability
        of states and local criminal justice systems to promote swift and certain punishment by: supporting
        statewide efforts, such as those proposed by Maryland and Connecticut, to systematically drug test
        and, if necessary treat, all drug offenders; establishing community-based courts and corrections
        that target and appropriately punish quality of life and nuisance crimes (i.e., prostitution,
        vandalism and public drunkenness), which would otherwise be ignored by local prosecutors and
        courts; funding teams of probation officers to work proactively with local police to closely
        supervise problem gang members, recovering drug addicts and sex offenders likely to repeat their
        crimes.

3. $150 million to keep guns out of the hauds of criminals. Of course, any new crime bill should
include the President's firearms priorities, which are largely budget neutral (Le., juvenile Brady, Brady II,
federal CAP legislation and child safety locks). We should also, however, consider the following new
proposals: (1) closing the loophole that exempts many firearms sales at gun shows and flea markets from
Brady background checks; (2) expanding the President's Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII)
 -- to trace all crime guns and investigate gun traffickers -- to an additional 20-40 cities; and (3) assembling
gun strike forces, or teams of federal prosecutors and ATF agents, that would target cities with high levels
of gun violence, crack down on illegal gun trafficking and prosecute felons and fugitives identified through
the Brady National Insta-Check System. Estimated funding for these last two initiatives would be about
$150 million.


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
prevention programs (i.e., $285 million in juvenile justice initiatives), we should also invest $100 million
to promote values-based crime and violence prevention. Consistent with the efforts of Rev. Eugene
Rivers and other ministers, who are trying to mobilize 1,000 black churches to work with youth in 50 of
the nation's worst neighborhoods, we should fund comprehensive prevention programs that seek to involve
faith-based and other institutions that can help instill and reinforce common sense values in troubled youth.

5. $3.4 billion to extend other popular initiatives from the 1994 Crime Act. With about $2.4 billion
in annual funding dedicated to the above mentioned programs, the remainder -- or about $3.4 billion
annually -- would be available to extend and build upon other initiatives from the 1994 Crime Act,
including -- a new Violence Against Women Act, more drug courts, substance abuse treatment for federal
and state prisoners, telemarketing fraud programs, and additional support for the FBI, DEA, ATF and other
federal law enforcement agencies.

Safe, Disciplined and Drug-Free Schools

At the White House Conference on School Safety, the President announced that he would overhaul and
strengthen the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program to help local school districts ensure that students have
safe, disciplined and drug-free environments for learning. Under this proposed reform, schools will have
to adopt rigorous, comprehensive school safety plans that include: tough, but fair discipline policies, such
as zero tolerance for guns and drugs; safe passage to and from schools; effective drug and violence policies
and programs; annual school safety and drug use report cards; links to after school programs; efforts to
involve parents; and crisis management plans. New funding: $394 million in FY 2000, $1.97 billion
through FY 2004
Total funding: $1 billion in FY 2000, $5 billion through FY 2004 To assist school districts in meeting
these more challenging standards, a new Safe, Disciplined and Drug-Free Schools Initiative should
include:

1. $700 million for states to fund comprehensive school safety plans. Although this represents an
increase of $174 million from the current state formula program, fewer schools will ultimately receive
more funds for much broader-based plans. Also, states will have to provide these grants on a competitive
-- not formula -- basis.

2. $250 million to target schools with serious crime and drug problems. This represents an increase
of $220 million for national school safety initiatives, including funds for a new $12 million School
Emergency Response to Violence initiative.

3. $50 million for drug prevention coordinators. This is the same request General McCaffrey
submitted for last year's budget.

Teen Courts

         Studies show that if children make it to their 18th birthday without using illegal drugs, alcohol or
tobacco, they are likely to avoid chemical dependence for the rest of their lives. To help keep kids from
ever turning to substance abuse -- and to reinforce the message that there are consequences associated with
drinking, smoking and taking drugs -- communities throughout the country are turning to teen courts that
hold young, first-time offenders accountable for their actions. Teen courts capitalize on the strength of
peer influence and send a strong message to offending youth that young people and the community will not
condone their law-breaking behavior. Sentences typically include community service, counseling and
victim restitution. There are currently about 500 teen courts operating nationwide, and they also cover

                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex.J.)wnP Convel'iion
FY 2000, $250 million through FY 2004. Total funding: $50 million in FY 2000, $250 million through
FY 2004
With $50 million in new funding, we could create 500 to 700 new teen courts each year.

Ensuring Parity for Substance Abuse Treatment

          Despite recent increases in federal spending on substance abuse treatment, appropriate treatment is
still not available to nearly half of those who need it. To help fill this treatment gap, we should propose
legislation that puts substance abuse treatment on par with other medical and surgical benefits. Similar to
the Mental Health Parity Act signed into law by the President in September 1996, parity legislation for
substance abuse treatment would generally prohibit health care providers already providing some substance
abuse benefit from setting annual or lifetime dollar limits on substance abuse treatment benefits at a lower
level than those set for other medical and surgical benefits.

Youth Drug Testing

        While overall drug use remains flat -- and nearly 50% below its peak in 1979 -- youth drug use
has increased dramatically and consistently since 1991. Thus, in addition to educating youth 'about the
dangers of illegal drugs and funding effective drug prevention programs, we should promote zero tolerance
for drug use through innovative youth drug testing,. New funding: $50 million in FY 2000, $250 million
through FY 2004.Total funding: $50 million in FY 2000, $250 million through FY 2004.

1. $25 million for mandatory pre-licensure drug testing. To deter drugged driving by youth and
provide a strong incentive for teens to stay drug-free, we should allocate new funds for the Department of
Transportation to work with states to drug test first-time applicants for drivers licenses.

2. $25 million for school-based drug testing. To help school districts throughout the country replicate
Miami's school-based drug testing initiative, we should provide the Department of Education with $50
million to fund local school districts' efforts to drug test middle and high school students if their parents
consent. Drug test results would be delivered directly to parents, and provisions could be made to refer
students who fail drug tests to treatment.

Expanding Medicaid Coverage for Drug Treatment

        Under current law, Medicaid serves as a major barrier to provide treatment for certain
poor, substance-abusing women. The Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD) exclusion under
Medicaid bars reimbursement for almost all residential substance abuse services in free-standing
programs, which is often the most effective form of treatment for pregnant substance abusers.
Moreover, any women who is otherwise eligible for Medicaid - but who also enrolls in a residential
treatment program -- loses her Medicaid eligibility for any services, including prenatal and
postpartum health care. In order to remove this obstacle to increased treatment for a high-need
population, we should support legislation to remove the IMD exclusion as it applies to residential
treatment for pregnant, post-partum women, and possibly other low-income, heavy drug users. New
funding: at least $550 million through FY 2004. Total funding: at least $550 million through FY
2004.

Drug and Tobacco Enforcement

        During the tobacco debate, we met with representatives from state, local and federal law

                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex.Dump Conversion
especially as a result of increased smuggling. In response to their concerns, we developed a drug and
tobacco enforcement initiative that we believe addressed the law enforcement community's concerns and
should be included in the FY 2000 budget. New Funding: $300 million in FY 2000, $1.5 billion through
FY 2004.Total Funding: $300 million in FY 2000, $1.5 billion through FY 2004. This proposal includes:

1. $200 million for drug enforcement and tobacco anti-smuggling grants. We propose creating a new
Justice Department grant program to allow state and local law enforcement agencies to hire additional
personnel, pay overtime costs, procure equipment and form multi-jurisdictional task forces that integrate
federal, state and local law enforcement efforts to combat drug trafficking and tobacco smuggling.
2. $100 million for ATF and Customs agents. We would also provide $75 million to hire additional
ATF agents and $25 million to fund more Customs agents to concentrate on drug and tobacco enforcement
activities at the federal level.

3. Alcohol Use By Youths and Binge Drinking. We are developing a variety of options for
Presidential actions regarding alcohol abuse. The alternatives include: endorsing legislation
sponsored by Rep. Joe Kennedy establishing voluntary codes for alcohol ads directed towards kids;
banning alcohol billboards near schools; a regulatory measure to discourage alcohol advertising on
youth-oriented web sites; codifying a ban on liquor ads on TV; a notice of inquiry to FCC to study
the effects of alcohol ads on children; and an educational program we are exploring with the
Department of Education using their Safe and Drug Free Schools Program - Rep. Kennedy also
has a bill on this subject. As you know, the Foundation sponsored by the Distillers has
approached us regarding participating in these efforts (they already have a policy banning
billboards but would publicly support this move).

Technology

1. Crime Technology. We have put 100,000 new cops on the streets, now we should make sure they are
trained and equipped with the best technology ever. The package will have quantitative commitments:
we will solve X% of unsolved cri~es, Y reduction in response times. The package will likely have 5
parts: a federal Quick Response Center that local departments can call regarding getting the best
technology immediately; a technology subsidy program for local departments; a training program run
through the National Guard; expanding the current DOJ pilot program on interagency work; and linking
the state, federal, and county forensics departments. The current cost is about $1 billion and the paper is
being developed primarily by OSTP and DOJ. It would also highlight 5 recent new technologies that have
come out of our existing research centers such as the one in Rome, NY.

Crimes Against Women

1. Violence Against Women Act (VAWA 11). In 1994, Congress passed the Violence Against Women
Act (VAWAn, an historic piece of federal legislation that contains a broad array of ground-breaking laws
to combat the epidemic of violence against women. Despite VAW A 1's success, legislators and advocates
alike agree that many gaps in our laws remain. Building upon these successful initial steps, VAWAIl
extends programs more comprehensively. Protection orders become national, hotlines are expanded, and
a college-affected program is created. (Cost: $1.6 billion over 4 years; $100 million increase in the first
year over authorized level; V AWA needs to be reauthorized in FY2001)

Guns

1. Criminal Disarmament Act. Research shows that most gun-related felonies are committed by felons,



                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
guns. This bill is a list of possible actions designed to take guns out of the hands of felons including:
making it a mandatory condition of probation and parole not to carry weapons and to submit to searches;
forcing DNA sampling of all convicted violent felons; broadening dissemination of names of probationers
and parolees and release conditions to police; and creating gun courts. (DO] is evaluating the cost)




EDUCATION INITIATIVES

Class Size Reduction.

         One of the most critical challenges we face next year is to put the class size reduction proposal
onto firm, long-term footing so that we can reach 100,000 teachers and an average class size of 18.
Accomplishing this will require that we improve the predictability of funding by moving the program to
the mandatory side of the budget, restoring the cost sharing requirements that help achieve our goal on
time, and restoring the full array of accountability measures in your original proposal, including required
competency testing for new teachers. Our best chance for accomplishing this would be to include this in a
budget reconciliation bill, ifthere is one next year. Ifnot, we will have to accomplish this through the
annual appropriations bill once again. Either way, our legislative effort will be accompanied by a
communications strategy that will provide you with a platform to press the issue (e.g., a Education
Department sponsored Class Size Reduction conference, the release of guidance to local districts on
implementing the program, the awarding of first year funding, etc.).

Ending Social Promotion.

         Your Education Opportunity Zones proposal was the vehicle for advancing your challenge to
end social promotions. However, because this proposal addre$ a number of other issues as well (i.e.,
rewarding successful school districts, turning around failing schools and removing low performing teachers)
it was too complicated to sell to the press and the public. The proposal was also unable to gain traction
in Congress; in the next Congress the most optimistic scenario is a two year effort to include this proposal
in the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. Therefore, we propose a different
approach in order to advance this agenda. We can simplify the message and the proposal to its essence:
end social promotions and the federal government will help finance the aftefSchool and summer school
necessary to provide extra help to students who need it. Rather than creating a new progmm, we instead
propose a $300 million increase in the 21st Century Learning fund, to $500 million. Priority for these
funds would be given to districts that have adopted policies to end social promotion, and successful
applicants would have to show the seps they are taking during the regular school day to help children
meet standards in the first place -- with early intervention, smaller classes, well prepared teachers, and
curriculum aligned to promotion standards.

Teacher Quality and Recruitment

1. Attracting talented new teachers into high-poverty schools and shortage areas like math and science, and
special education. More than 2 million teachers must be hired in the next ten years to accommodate


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex.Dwnp Conversion
number of teachers, but perhaps even more important is the opportunity to ensure aquality teaching force
for decades by attracting talented young people and midcareer professionals into high-poverty schools and
shortage subject areas. With 2/3 of teachers in classrooms in the year 2006 still to be hired, there may be
no better long-term strategy to improve the quality of the teaching force by attracting talented young people
into teaching as well as mid-career professionals such as retirees from the military, individuals in firms
being downsized, doctoral students who face tough job markets for professorships in higher education,
teachers' aides, and other professionals with expertise in math, scienc~ or engineering.

        A Recruiting talented young people into teaching A $100 million increase for the newly enacted
        Teacher Quality Section of the Higher Education Act could provide scholarships and other support
        to help (over five years) an approximately 60,000 additional high-ability prospective teachers that
        commit to teaching in high-need schools. We would need to couple this funding level with
        appropriations earmarking most of it specifically for the newly enaded teacher recruitment
        component of this program; otherwise, under current law only 10 of these funds would be
        earmarked for scholarships, while the rest would be split evenly between teacher education
        programs and state education agencies. Kennedy and Jeffords are likely to sUppDrt this approach,
        though Bill Goodling may be an obstacle.

        B. Recruiting mid-career professionals into teaching and supporting alternative routes to certification.
        While the successful Troop-to-Teachers program is currently being phased out because the a-a of
        military downsizing has ended, a new initiative could preserve some of the successful components
        of this effort while expanding its reach to a broader range of midcareer professionals (including
        military personnel, employees in firms being downsizeq graduate students facing grim pros peds
        on the academic job market, an other professionals with expertise in math, science, and
        technology). We would propose a $55 million competitive grant program to states that submitted
        plans for expanding high-quality alternative routes to certification for midcareer professionals and
        recruiting a wide array of mid-career professionals into teaching. This funding would a) create a
        center in each state winning a grant to provide information, counseling, and brokerng services to
        mid-career professionals interested in teaching, giving a preference to the expansion of existing
        Troops-to-Teachers and other centers with a demonstrated track record, b) create or expand
        alternative recruitment and certification programs hat help mid-career professionals enter into
        teaching by providing structured ways to enter teaching, and covering the costs of mentors in the
        classroom for the first two years and course work needed to complete alternative certification, c)
        support a national public relations campaign focusing on the importance of the teaching profession
        and encouraging young people and midcareer professionals to consider careers in teaching. We
        are exploring whether this program could best be incorporated into the Highe Education Ad
        provisions mentioned above, or the Eisenhower Professional Development program.

2. Campaign to Strengthen Teacher Education. The Higher Education Act enaded last year provides the
platform and tools for a nationwide campaign to strengthID teacher education, including a new requirement
for (states to produce) report cards on the quality of schools of education, and a new grant program to
help states strengthen teacher certification standards, and institutions of higher education strengtherteacher
preparation programs. The elements of the campaign include: (1) issuing regulations to implement the
education school report card provisions, including a model report card; (2) conduding grant competitions
to strengthen state certification requrements (to approximately 20 states) and to form lighthouse teacher




                                                                       Automated Records MWlagement System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
you would hold with university presidents and state education leaders in which y<DI challenge them to take
the steps necessary to strengthen or close down education schools; (4) efforts by Secretary Riley to
amplify the message around the country; and(5) a request for additional funds for these programs in the
FY 2000 budget.

3. Reducing Out-ofField Teaching. Depending upon the subject area,between 25 and 55 of secondary
school teachers are teaching subjects in which they lack a major or minor in college, and the percentage of
teachers teaching out -of- field is higher in urban II1d isolated rural schools. To address this, we propose
an increase of ($5()'100 million) for Eisenhower national programs, to be used to send teachers who are
teaching out-of-field back to college to take additional courses in the subjects they are teachiIg. The funds
would be targeted to teachers who teach out of field on a continuing rather than onetime basis. While
the bulk of the funds should be targeted to urban schools, we have not yet determined whether the funds
should be made available to states, directly to local school systems, or both. We are also working to
determine the best way to link these funds to a requirement that new secondary teachers pass competency
tests in the subject(s) they will teach before being hired.

4. School Leadership Academies. While our primary emphasis must be on improving the quality of
teachers, we can strengthen the effectiveness of our teacher programs (including our new initiatives in
reading and class size reduction) by careful attention to stnngthening the quality of elementary school
principals. Research has long shown that principal leadership is a key to school effectiveness, yet little has
been done at the national, state or local level to upgrade the management and instructional leadershp> skills
of principals. To address this, we propose a new initiative, initially targeted to elementary school
principals in high poverty school districts, that would establishXX principal leadership academies. Initial
funding (approximately $50 million) would be provided under the national programs of the Eisenhower
Professional Development, and the overall program would be expanded to other communities and to
secondary schools through our ESEA reauthorization proposal. The academies, established compelitively,
would involve partnerships among school districts, institutions of higher education, non profits and
businesses with particular expertise in management training. The academies would be responsible for
providing high quality training and ongoing stpport to principals on such topics as instructional leadership,
effective reading instruction, teacher evaluation, school discipline, and overall management skills.

Expanding Public School Choice

1. Continuing to expand Charter Schools. We will propose a $20 million increase in charter schools
funding, to $120 million. This will enable us to support the start up of an estimated 2,027 schools, and
keep us on track to 3,000 charter schools by 2002.

2. Expanding Public School Choice. In addition to continuing our efforts   to expand charter schools, we
are developing several additional possible approaches to expanding public school choice that can provide
alternatives to conventional public schools and may promote school integrateion, espeially for students in
urban school systems. The approaches we are developing include:

        A. Work-Site Schools. We propose the use of magnet school grants and tax credits to
        encourage the creation of public schools located at work sites. These schools are developed
        in partnerships between school districts and local businesses and serve primarily children of
        the employees. The teachers, curriculum, and instructional materials are provided by the

                                                                                        Management system
                                                                     AutOtnl\ted Records .
                                                                     Hcx-DumP Con'letSl0n
        thirty existing work-site schools show that these schools (1) can be more diverse than other
        schools, because work sites are more diverse than residential neighborhoods (2) provide new
        facilities at no cost to the district (3) save employers costs associated with employee turnover
        and absenteeism and (4) increase parental involvement in the schools. Companies would be
        eligible for tax credits against a portion of the costs of the facilities provided to local
        districts. School districts, in partnership with businesses, would be eligible to compete for
        grants to support the costs of planning and implementation, including curriculum
        development, staff training, and coordination between the district, employers, work-site
        schools, and neighboring schools. Estimated funding for grants: 50 districts at an average
        of $1 million per year. (Total cost $50 million.) The cost of the tax credit has not been
        established.

        B. Interdistrict Magnet Programs. We are exploring expanding the magnet school
        program to       fund interdistrict magnet schools - schools created by two or more school
        districts that are open to all students from participating districts to reduce racial isolation.
        This expansion would be targeted toward urban districts with high concentrations of
        minority and poor students that partner with suburban districts. These grants would fund
        planning and implementation activities, including curriculum development, teacher
        training, student recruitment, and instructional personnel for the magnet program,
        equipment, extended day instructional activities and public information efforts to promote
        and explain these programs to affected communities. In FY 2000, we would fund
        planning expenses for 50 projects at a cost of $25 million ($500,000 per project), though the
        implementation costs are estimated at an average of $2.5 million per project, for an annual
        cost of $125 million in FY 2001 and beyond.

        C. University-Based Schools.      We are also exploring an initiative to help create K-12
        magnet schools on university campuses. This approach would take advantage of the
        facilities and resources of urban universities and locate new public schools in desirable
        locations, a combination which could be attractive to a wide range of parents and could
        therefore help promote school integration. In addition, locating schools on college campuses
        would complement the goals of the GEAR UP program, by sparking college aspirations of
        low income students and facilitating mentoring and tutoring programs. In FY 2000 we
        could fund approximately 50 projects at an average cost of $1.5 million. (Total cost: $75
        million).


ENVIRONMENT INITIATIVES

Lands Legacy

1. Partnership For America's Resources. In discussions with Interior and CEQ, we believe you should
consider an initiative that builds on the Administration's conservation achievements to prl£ct and restore
precious lands across the country. This proposal would voucus on purchasing and restoring lands and
could include l)Northern Forests; 2) Urban Parks; 3) and land along the Missouri River. A larger
proposal would draw down on funds from he Land Water Conservation Fund and other existing sources.
This would cost around $3 billion. A more targeted proposal being looked at by CEQ would cost in the
range of $400 to $500 million.

                                                                                 .ecords Management System
                                                                                 1)
                                                                      Automaed N
                                                                            t
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

1. Expansion of the Child Care and Development Block Grant. We propose to expand the Child Care
and Development Block Grant as previously proposed in the FY 1999 Budget. The block grant is the
primary federal child care subsidy program, helping low-income working families struggling to pay for
child care. Funds are distributed by formula to the states to operate direct child care subsidy programs, as
well as to improve the quality and availability of care. Currently, over one million children are served by
the program, leaving roughly nine million children who are eligible but unserved. Cost: $7.5 billion over
five years.

2. Expansion of the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit. The Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit
provides tax relief for families who pay for the care of a child under 13 or a disabled dependent or spouse
in order to work. The credit is equal to a percentage of the taxpayer's employment-related expenditures
for child or dependent care, with the amount of the credit depending on the taxpayer's income. As in the
FY 1999 Budget, we propose increasing the credit for families earning under $60,000, providing an
additional average tax cut of $358 for these families and eliminating income tax liability for almost all
families with incomes below 200% of poverty ($35,000 for a family of four) who take the maximum
allowable child care expenses under the law. Cost: $5.1 billion over five years to expand the credit for
three million working families.

3. New Parent Paid Leave Plan. Many workers who have access to unpaid (whether through the FMLA
or employer-provided leave) are unable to take it because they simply cannot afford to do so. To address
this problem, the President could propose a New Parent Paid Leave Plan to provide eligible parents with
partial wage replacement for up to six or twelve weeks following birth or adoption. The cost of the plan
will vary considerably based on the selected eligibility criteria. One option: all new parents with median
income or below (roughly $37,000/yr) who have been in the workforce for at least one year would be
eligible for a $200/week partial wage replacement for up to four weeks (weekly figure based on average UI
benefit). Eligible workers would be required to use the federal benefit immediately following birth or
adoption and before using any employer-provided leave benefit, but could receive the benefit whether or
not they ultimately returned to work. The program would be administered through the Unemployment
Insurance System. Cost of option: very roughly, $875 million for FY 2000 (including start-up and
administrative expenses). We will have more options and better costing next week.

4. FMLA Expansion to Businesses with 25 Workers. Since the Family and Medical Leave Act was
enacted in 1993, millions of Americans have taken FMLA-covered leave to care for a newborn or adopted
child, attend to their own serious health needs, or care for a seriously ill parent, child or spouse -- without
fear of losing their job or health insurance. Under current law, workers are eligible for FMLA coverage
only if they work at a business with 50 or more employees and if they have worked at least twelve months
and 1,250 hours for the employer. (Today, about 67 million Americans -- over half of all workers -- are
covered by the FMLA. Senator Dodd proposed lowering the threshold to businesses with 25 or more
employees, and Senator Kennedy champions a proposal to lower the threshold to 10. While the President
has consistently referenced his support for expanding the FMLA benefit, the Administration has not
formally presented a proposal in this area. We recommend advancing a specific proposal to lower the
FMLA threshold to 25 or more workers, expanding coverage for up to ten million more American
workers. No budget implications.

5. Parent Education and Support Fund. The White House Conference on Early Childhood
Development and Learning spotlighted the critical importance of children's earliest years of life to their
development and later success in life. Parents play the central role in providing children with
developmentally appropriate stimulation and attention during these years. In addition, studies have


                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
development. We propose the creation of a competitive grant program administered by HHS to fund
parent education and support programs, including the development or expansion of home visitation
programs, efforts to educate and engage parents in child care and other efforts to improve child care
quality, and the establishment of "second chance maternity homes" to support teen mothers and teach
parenting skills. This fund would support programs such as HIPPY, Parents as First Teachers, home
visitation, and other parenting education programs. Cost: $500 million over five years.

6. Tax Relief for Parents, Including Parents who Stay at Home. The following are a series of
proposals that would benefit families in which a parent stays at home (all estimates are rough and
preliminary). We are currently exploring a variety of iterations of each proposal, but will settle on only
one proposal. Also note that these proposals interact differently with an expanded Child and Dependent
Care Tax Credit, and therefore, the selection of one of these policies will be informed by our decision on
the DCTC. Options:

        A. Expand the Child Tax Credit. The Child Tax Credit is currently $500 per child for children
        under 17. We propose to double the credit to $1,000 per child for those children under the age of
        four. The Child Tax Credit begins to fade out for taxpayers whose adjusted gross income exceeds
        $110,000 each year ($75,000 ifnot married). Cost: Roughly $11 to $13 billion over 5 years.
        Another option is to double the credit for families with children under the age of two, which would
        cost roughly $4 billion over five years.

        B. Increase the Standard Deduction. Most lower-income families (incomes ofless than $50,000)
        do not itemize their deductions, choosing to take the standard deduction (and using the simpler
        form) instead, while most higher income families choose to itemize. Therefore, a proposal to
        expand the standard deduction for children would help lower-income families. Currently, the
        standard deduction is roughly $7,200 for married couples, and $6,350 for heads of households.
        We could increase the standard deduction by $1,000 for families with children for each child
        under 3, regardless of the marital status of the parents, and would cover roughly 3 million
        taxpayers (three quarters of whom are married couples) and 3 million children. The average
        benefit would be $170 per taxpayer. Cost: $2.5 to $3.5 billion over five years. We are
        currently exploring a variety of other options, including a proposal to expand the standard
        deduction by $2,000 per family.

        C. Expand the DCTC. We could extend the benefits of our DCTC proposal to stay-at-home
        parents with children age three and under, by applying the same eligibility guidelines and
        assuming minimum child-care expenses of $150 per family per month. This proposal would also
        phase out the credit for families with annual income over $105,000. Cost: A variant of this
        proposal was estimated at roughly $13 billion over 5 years ($8 billion above our DCTC
        proposal).

7. Expansion of After-School Programs. An estimated five million school-age children spend time as
"latchkey kids" without adult supervision during a typical week. Research indicates that during these
unsupervised hours children are more likely to engage in at-risk behavior, such as crime, drugs, and
alcohol use. To meet this pressing demand, the President can propose a dramatic expansion of
after-school care. Areas of expansion:

        A. 21st Century Learning Centers. The program increases the supply of after-school care in a
        cost-effective manner primarily by funding programs that use public schools and their existing
        resources, such as computers, gymnasiums, and sports equipment. We should build on the success


                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
        $700 million for FY 2000. [part of these funds would be used for summer-school programs for
        school districts that end social promotion.]

        B. Supporting community-based after-school programs. Because so many of the most
        effective after-school programs are community based, such as the Boys and Girls Clubs, we
        propose expanding the Department of Justice's At-Risk Youth Initiative. We propose expanding
        the program by $50 million, but targeting the funds for after-school initiatives by
        community-based organizations. Cost: $250 million over five years.

        C. Expanding AmeriCorps' support for after-school. An expanded AmeriCorps could
        increase the availability of after school and summer programming for children and youth while
        providing additional opportunities for young adults to earn money for college through service.
        AmeriCorps Members serve with many of the major community-based organizations that provide
        after school care (including YMCA, Save the Children, and Boys and Girls Clubs); many others
        serve in public schools. We propose supporting a targeted initiative in which ten thousand
        AmeriCorps Members would conduct a 10-week summer program involving up to 100,000
        middle-school children. Cost: Roughly $35 to $40 million per year, or a cost of $200 million
        over five years.

8. Child Welfare: Children "Aging Out" of Foster Care. Each year, nearly 20,000 18-year-olds "age
out" of the public child welfare system. These young adults entered foster care due to abuse and neglect,
were unable to return to their birth families, and were not adopted. Federal financial support for these
young people ends just at the time they are making the critical transition to adulthood. Research shows
that they face unstable housing and hortlelessness, low educational achievement, depression, poor health,
and violence and incarceration. When they tum 18, they also very often find themselves with no health
insurance, as Medicaid eligibility ends at age 18. Areas for increased investment:

        A. Expand the Independent Living Program. Administered by HHS, the Independent Living
        Program provides services to foster care children aged 16 to 18 to help them (1) make the
        transition to independence by earning a high school diploma; (2) receive vocational training; and
        (3) learn daily living skills such as budgeting, locating housing, planning a career, and finding a
        job. Begun in 1986, the program assists 85,000 young people and has been funded at $70 million
        since 1992. We recommend increasing the Independent Living Program by 50 percent - to
        $105 million in FY 2000 and $525 over five years.

        B. Expand the Transitional Living Program. The Transitional Living Program is an
        HHS-administered, $15 million competitive grant program that funds community-based
        organizations that provide services to this population, including housing support. We recommend
        doubling the increasing to $30 million in FY 2000 and $75 million over five years.

        C. Provide Medicaid Coverage. We recommend giving states the option of using Federal
        Medicaid dollars to provide health care coverage for this population -- cost TBD; roughly
        hundreds of millions over 5 years).

9. Child Welfare: Adoption Registry. In 1996, the President called for a plan to double to number of
children adopted each year from the foster care system. Adoption 2002 - the initiative developed by HHS
in response to President's charge -- included efforts to break down barriers to adoption. The
Administration secured $10 million in FY 1999 for HHS discretionary Adoption Opportunities Grants for
this purpose. One use of this grants will be the creation of an Internet-based adoption registry of foster



                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
children. We recommend increasing the Adoption Opportunities grants by 20 percent to $12
million for FY 2000 and$60 million over five years, targeted to the upkeep of this Internet-based
national adoption registry.

10. Child Welfare: Court Improvement. The Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997, aimed at
moving children in foster care more quickly to adoptive and other permanent homes, shortened the
timeframes in which permanency decisions must be made for children in foster care. This has put more
pressure on an already over-burdened and resource-deficient family and juvenile court system. Courts
particularly need additional support to improve automation and computer systems to track foster care
children and to reduce the pending backlogs of abuse and neglect cases. In addition, the Court Appointed
Special Advocate program, which pairs a trained volunteer with child abuse cases to serve in an advocacy
role, needs to be expanded to under-served areas. We recommend the creation ofa new
DOJ-administered grant program to automate the data collection and tracking of proceedings in abuse and
neglect courts and a one-time grant to expand CASA to under-served areas. Cost: TBD, roughly 15
million for FY 2000 and $55 million over five years.


11. [Flexible Work Hours for Families. BrucelElena: We are beginning to think through this proposal,
and are looking for guidance as to whether we should continue to pursue it.] Options:

        A. Tax credit for businesses that provide flexible work schedules for their employees. We
        propose to offer tax credits to companies that offer a variety of family-friendly benefits, including
        flexible work hours for their employees, compressed work weeks, part-time work with benefits,
        job sharing, career sequencing, and extended parental leave. Such a tax credit would enable
        parents to spend more time with their children by providing companies, both small and medium
        sized, the ability to respond to the time crunch families are facing. In addition, it builds on our
        flex-time and family-leave proposals. Awaiting estimation by Treasury.

        B. Subsidies: We propose that the Commerce Department would make grants to states who
        would in tum provide grants to eligible businesses that provide flexible work hours for their
        employees, including flexible work hours for their employees, compressed work weeks, part-time
        work with benefits, job sharing, career sequencing, and extended parental leave. Within the
        grant-making process, priority would be given to small and medium sized businesses. Businesses
        would be required to ensure that the funds would be used to supplement and not supplant any
        ongoing efforts in this area. Very rough cost estimate: $500 million over five years.


FOOD SAFETY INmATIVES

1. Food Safety. Theme: National Food Safety Crackdown. We propose deputizing the literally
thousands of state and local agencies that regulate food safety in order to develop a vertically integrated
national food safety inspection system. We will be proposing MOV's, legislation, and resources to
integrate standards, leverage resources, and expand coverage in each of the crucial areas: surveillance,
research, inspections, and education. In addition, this proposal includes working with the states to
achieve full adoption of the model Food Code for restaurants and developing performance standards for
food service workers. We also will continue to seek legislation that will give USDA the authority to issue
mandatory recalls and impose civil penalties for unsafe meat and pOUltry. (Cost: $87 million of additional
money. $49 million for FDA, $18 for CDC, $20 USDA.)

                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

Long-Term Care

        This initiative could be part of a "preparing for Medicare long-term reform" package; a
women's initiative if coupled with pension policies for women or family leave policies; or with an
elderly housing initiative (policies to promote.maintaining home ownership, beginning to promote
assisted living facilities, and ensuring quality in nursing homes).

1. Long-term care tax credit. (new policy) Along with the lack of coverage of prescription drugs,
the poor coverage of long-term care represents a major cost burden for the elderly and their
families. Long-term care costs account for nearly half of all out-of-pocket health expenditures for
Medicare beneficiaries. This proposal would give people with three or more limitations in activities
of daily living (ADL) or their caregivers a tax credit of up to $1,000 to help pay for formal or
informal long-term care. (Cost: About $6 billion over 5 years).

2. Offering private long-term care insurance to Federal employees. (new policy) Since expanding
Federal programs alone cannot address the next century's long-term care needs, the Federal
government -- as the nation's largest employer -- could serve as a model employer by promoting
high-quality private long-term care insurance policies to its employees. Under this proposal, OPM
would offer its employees the choice of buying differing types of policies and use its market leverage
to extract better prices for these policies. There would be no Federal contribution for this
coverage. (Cost: Small administrative costs; OPM estimates about 300,000 participants).

3. Family Caregiver Support Program. (new policy) . About 50 million people provide some type
of long-term care to family and friends. Families who have a relative who develops long-term care
needs often do not know how to provide such care and where to turn for help. This proposal would
give grants from the Administration on Aging to states to provide for a "one-stop-shop" access point
to assist families who care for elderly relatives with 2 or more ADL limitations and/or severe
cognitive impairment. This assistance would include providing information, counseling, training
and arranging for respite services for caregivers. (Cost: About $500 -750 million over 5 years;
discretionary).

4. Nursing home quality initiative. (expanding on administrative initiative) On July 21, the
President announced an initiative to toughen enforcement tools and strengthen Federal oversight of
nursing home quality. On October 22nd, the Justice Department and HCFA held a conference to
begin to develop other quality/anti-fraud and abuse initiatives with enforcement agencies from
around the nation. Proposals to respond to these challenges and to implement the initiatives the
President outlined in July can be included in the budget or as freestanding legislation. The
initiative will no doubt include new enforcement provisions (e.g., increased penalties, etc.), as well as
new funds to conduct more frequent surveys of repeat offenders and improve surveyor training.
We are also working with DHHS and BUD to explore the possibility of establishing a Commission
to oversee HCFA's nursing home enforcement efforts as well as to begin to look at other types of
housing where health care is offered (e.g., assisted living facilities). (Costs: $500 - 750 million over
5 years).

Disability

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
integration grant proposal and the access to information technologies initiative.

1. Jeffords-Kennedy Work Incentives Improvement Act. (Congressional proposal; not passed in
1998) In the final budget negotiations this year, the Administrative put the Jeffords-Kennedy bill
on its list of priorities for passage. This bill would enable people with disabilities to go back to
work by providing an option to buy into Medicaid and Medicare, as well as other pro-work
initiatives. Although it was rejected by Republicans, the Administration has been stating that we
will continue to fight to give people with disabilities the opportunity to work -- including the critical
health insurance that makes work possible. (Cost: About $1.2 billion over 5 years).

2. Tax credit for work-related impairment expenses for people with disabilities. (new policy)
,
Almost 75 percent of people with significant disabilities are unemployed; for many, the high costs of
support services/devices, as well as the potential to lose Medicaid or Medicare coverage, prevent
them from seeking and keeping jobs. This proposal would give a tax credit of $1,000 to $5,000
(depending on the design and costs) to people with disabilities who work, in recognition of their
formal and informal costs associated with employment. This policy complements the
Jeffords-Kennedy Work Incentive proposal, described above, but has the advantage of helping
people in all states irrespective of whether states take up optional coverage. (Cost: Depends on the
options; $1 to 2 billion over 5 years).

3. Promoting Medicaid de-institutionalization. One of the biggest frustrations for people with
severe disabilities and their families is the "institutional bias" in Medicaid - meaning the tendency
to simply put people with great health care needs in nursing homes rather than develop viable,
community-based alternatives. In 1998, HHS funded a small demonstration project in 4 states to
test different models for offering people with disabilities the choice of care settings. This proposal
would build on these tests by developing and propagating models that give people residing in a
nursing home after a "date certain" a choice of care settings. (Cost: $50 million over 5 years).

4. Medigap reform for people with disabilities. In 1997, the President endorsed bipartisan
legislation from Rockefeller, Chafee and Nancy Johnson that makes Medigap supplemental
insurance more accessible to beneficiaries. The Balanced Budget Act did include some of its
important protections for seniors on Medicare, but essentially excluded beneficiaries with
disabilities from this reform. This proposal would make all Medigap insurers provide Medigap to
people with disabilities when they sign up for Medicare. It would also ensure that they get a
guaranteed issue Medigap option when in the event that their HMO withdraws from Medicare.
(Cost: not clear that there will be costs).

Modernizing Medicare

      These policies could "lay the groundwork" for the recommendations of the Medicare
commission and re-affirm our ongoing commitment to improve and modernize Medicare.

1. Adopting private sector, competitive pricing strategies. (FY 1998 budget) The President has
consistently supported giving the Health Care Financing Administration the same tools to manage
health care costs as are used by private sector plans. This includes competitive pricing for services
like durable medical equipment and other supplies; expanding the competitive pricing
demonstration for managed care; and adopting new payment methodologies like Centers of
Excellence, among others. Although these ideas are being considered by the Medicare
Commission, the President could take the lead on increased competition within Medicare since he

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

3. Reducing Medicare fraud and overpayment. (Some FY 1999 policies; some new policies)
Medicare fraud poses a serious threat to its financial well-being. In every budget for the last 5
years, the President has proposed new initiatives to help combat excessive payments and provider
fraud in Medicare. Last year alone, Medicare saved over $1 billion through these efforts. The
President announced last January a 10-point plan for reducing fraud and overpayment, including
provisions like reducing overpayments for drugs and ensuring Medicare does not pay for claims
that ought to be paid by private insurers. HHS and the Department of Justice coutinue their
efforts to enforce current policies and develop new ones. (Savings: From $1 to 3 billion over 5
years, depending on the policies).

4. Protecting beneficiaries from HMO withdrawals from Medicare. This year, a number of
HMOs have pulled out of Medicare with only a few months notice, leaving 50,000 beneficiaries with
no plan options in their areas. These withdrawals are causing beneficiaries unnecessary hardships
as they rush to find alternative sources of coverage. The President has stated his determination to
work with the Secretary of HHS and Congress to develop legislation to prevent this behavior in the
future (e.g., limit the time between when a plan files to participate in Medicare and when
enrollment begins, making it less necessary for plans to pull out at the last minute). (Cost: not clear
that there will be costs).

5. Prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries. (new policy) The lack of coverage for
prescription drugs in Medicare is widely believed to be its most glaring shortcoming. Virtually
every private health plan for the under-65 population has a drug benefit, in recognition of the
medical community's reliance on prescriptions for the provision of much of the care provided to
Americans. Lack of Medicare coverage of drugs results in high out-of-pocket beneficiary costs -
which will only become larger in the next century since the vast majority of advances in health care
interventions will be pharmacologically-based. Responding to this fact, Republicans and
Democrats on the Medicare Commission, as well as almost every health care policy expert, are
consistently stating that reforming Medicare without addressing the prescription drug coverage
issue would be a mistake. We are developing a wide variety of options, including a means-tested
Medicaid option, a managed care benefit only approach, a traditional benefit for all beneficiaries,
and an unsubsidized purchasing mechanism that uses Medicare's size as leverage for drug discounts
for beneficiaries. If desirable, a proposal could be included in the budget or coordinated with the
March release of the Medicare Commission's recommendations. (Cost: Varies significantly
depending on proposal, ranging from $1 to 20 billion a year).

6. Redesigning and increasing enrollment in Medicare's premium assistance program (extension of
July executive action and new policy). Over 3 million low-income Medicare beneficiaries are
eligible but do not receive Medicaid coverage of their Medicare premiums and cost sharing. Many
more may not get enough assistance through the new, BBA provision that is supposed to help higher
income beneficiaries. We are developing a range of proposals that build on the President's actions
in this area to better utilize Social Security Offices to educate beneficiaries about this program, to
reduce administrative complexity for states and to give them incentives to engage in more aggressive
outreach efforts. (Costs vary depending on policies; up to $500 million over 5 years).

7. Cancer clinical trials demonstration (FY 1999 budget; not passed). Less than three percent of
cancer patients participate in clinical trials. Moreover, Americans over the age of 65 make up half
of all cancer patients, and are 10 times more likely to get cancer than younger Americans. This
proposed three-year demonstration, extremely popular with the cancer patient advocacy

                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
(Cost: $750 million over 3 years).

8. Providing needed education funds to children's hospitals. (new policy) Medicare has invested
billions of dollars in graduate medical education to hospitals since 1966. However, because of its
current formula, free-standing children's hospitals are forced to shoulder the majority of the cost of
training pediatricians, placing them at a severe financial disadvantage. This proposal would
consider addition funding outside of Medicare to provide reimbursement for the training costs
incurred by children's hospitals. Addressing children's hospitals' education financing has
bipartisan support, and Senator Frist has made this a priority for the Medicare Commission.
(Costs: depends on the proposal).

Health Insurance Coverage Expansions

        The rising number of uninsured makes the need to propose insurance expansions important.

1. Small business purchasing cooperatives (different version in previous budgets; not passed).
Over a quarter of workers in firms with fewer than 10 employees lack health insurance - almost
twice the nationwide average. This results in large part because administrative costs are higher
and small businesses pay more for the same benefits as larger firms. This initiative encourages the
development of purchasing groups modeled on FEHBP by allowing them to be considered
non-profits (which will facilitate private foundation support), providing Federal grant support, and
having the Office of Personnel Management provide technical assistance. We are also considering
giving employees who purchase coverage through the purchasing groups with tax credits to
encourage them to take up coverage. (Cost: about $50 to 100 million over 5 years).

2. Children's health insurance outreach (FY 1999 budget; not passed and new policy). To date, 42
states have had their CHIP plans approved. These new expansions have great potential to help
uninsured children, but not if families do not know or understand the need for insurance.
Moreover, over 4 million uninsured children are eligible for Medicaid today. To facilitate spending
on outreach, this proposal would allow states to draw down more of its CHIP allotment for
outreach. An additional proposal is to pay for a nationwide toll-free number that connects families
with state eligibility workers. NGA is sponsoring this line for one year only; such a line is essential
for the nationwide media campaign that we are planning to launch in January with the NGA.
(Cost: small but unknown at this point; could be funded through tobacco recoupment)

3. Demonstration of Medicare buy-in for people ages 55 to 65 (full proposal in FY 1999 budget;
not passed). Americans ages 55 to 65 have a greater risk of becoming sick; have a weakened
connection to work-based health insurance, and face high premiums in the individual insurance
market. The latest report shows that the uninsured are growing at the fastest rate in this age
group; by 2010, the number of uninsured people age 55 to 65 will nearly double. Building on
last-year's proposal, we could allow a limited number of people ages 62 to 65 and displaced workers
ages 55 to 65 to buy into Medicare. As a demonstration, this might gain the support that it lacked
last year. (Cost: at least $500 million over 5 years, which would assist about 30,000 people).
Public Health

1. National Cardiac Arrest Emergency Plan. Each year, 350,00 Americans suffer cardiac arrest. The
American Heart Association estimates that a national plan in this area could save almost one-third, or
100,000 lives. We are working with HHS to endorse a Cardiac Arrest Survival Act which provides for:
(I) the development of a model state training program for cardiac arrest care providers in lifesaving

                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  H~~~~::~~;·---····"· -~._u
access to emergency medical services (Good Samaritan laws); and (3) coordination of a national database
to track incidence of cardiac arrest to determine whether cardiac arrest care providers can improve survival
rates.


HOMELESSNESS INITIATIVES

1. Fighting Homelessness. A three-part proposal which would: (1) assist the approximately 250,000
homeless veterans by increasing residential alternatives, community-based contracted care, job preparation
activities, stand down activities (community-sponsored events that conduct one-stop service delivery
programs for homeless veterans), the distribution of clothing, and long-term housing. This measure would
provide the single largest investment into breaking the cycle of homelessness among veterans; (2) allow
VA to sell surplus property with 10 percent of proceeds going to homeless veterans; and (3) a
demonstration project targeted to the chronically homeless which would test the most promising models for
moving chronically homeless to self-sufficiency using a combination of permanent housing and links to
mainstream services. Research shows that the chronically homeless, who are less than 10 percent of the
entire homeless population, use approximately 50 percent of the resources. (Cost: Total is $105 million--
$60 million for VA and $45 million for HUD demonstration project)


IMMIGRATION INITIATIVES

1. Adult Literacy (ESL) linked to civics instruction (new policy). Approximately 25% of adults with
the most serious literacy needs are immigrants. This proposal would target a portion of the overall Adult
Literacy effort to ESL for recent immigrants. In addition, because many within this same population are
also in need of civics and/or citizenship education, the literacy/English-language classes could have a
component that is designed to instruct on basic civics and citizenship information. The third wrinkle to
this idea is technology. According to the Department of Education, technology can be a useful instruction
tool for adults (because it allows instruction to take place in private; at home; at night; etc.). Thus, we
could structure a competitive grant program (through the Department of Education) wh~re successful
proposals would have three components: (1) English language instruction for adults; (2) an instructional
component related to civics and citizenship; and (3) with preference for programs that use technology
(internet; video-links). (Cost: ?? -- addition to Andrea's list of literacy ideas)


NATIONAL SERVICE INITIATIVES

1. Ending Taxability of AmeriCorps Award. Change the tax status of AmeriCorps education
awards so that they are not taxable. Comparable benefits, including the GI Bill, are not taxable.
This tax liability has caused economic hardship, particularly for former AmeriCorps members who
are enrolled in college full-time after completing their service and do not have the resources to pay
the tax. Cost: $6-11 million (due to a recent ruling by the ms, this estimate is expected to be
revised downward shortly).

2. Expand AmeriCorps for After School. Expand service programs to provide volunteers to serve
as afterschool and summer school coordinators, tutors and mentors. (1) Expand AmeriCorps.
Increase the availability of afterschool and summer programming for children while providing additional
opportunities for young adults to earn money for college through seri:e. Cost: $80 million for 10,000


                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
 students (assumes 50 community match). (2)A,meriCorns*Seniors: Expand and rename existing
 demonstration program currently providing 1,000 seniors to 9 sites for tutoring and mentoring activities.
 In exchange for providing 15-20 hours service per week, seniors are eligible for incentives including, a
 small lifelong learning award or an offset on the cost of prescription drugs. Evaluations have shown
 increased test scores among the participating students and increased community involvement in the local
 schools. Cost: $2-3 million for 10,000 AmeriCorps Seniors.

 3. Encourage High Schools to OfferlRequire Service Learning. The Learn and Serve America
 program provides formula grants to states to implement school-based service activities. CNS is proposing
 the addition of a competitive component targeted toward large-scale implementation of service programs in
 schools. Some states and districts, including Maryland, Chicago, and (est. fall 1999) California are
 integrating service into their graduation requirements. This proposal would target technical assistance,
 including school-based service coordinators and curriculum implementation, for those states and districts
 that are implementing service learning programs and/or requirements. Cost: CNS has requested $80
 million, an increase of$37 million for FY 2000.


 NATIVE AMERICANS

  1. 1000 New Teachers for Native American Students. This initiative creates an American Indian Corps
  of Teachers (ACT) and has three parts: (1) funding for 25 grants to institutions to create teacher training
. programs for Native American communities; (2) creating five centers to provide continuing education for
  in-service teachers to improve the quality of teaching to Native American communities; and (3) a
  fellowship program that will fund 1000 new American Indian and Alaska Native teachers over 4 years by
  providing for their expenses while attending school, including child care. (Cost: $37.5 million in first
  year (fellowships are $80 million over 4 years); Julie and Mary have been working on this together)


 WELFARE REFORM INITIATIVES

 Refocus the Welfare to Work Program

         In order to continue our investment in the hardest to employ, we should reauthorize the
 Welfare-to-Work program for five years at current funding levels of $1.5 billion annually. Within this
 funding level, ~e could:

 1. Target $300 million in competitive grant funds for work-focused projects to address the
 challenges of literacy, substance abuse, and disabilities. We could designate a similar set aside within
 the competitive grants funds to be awarded in FY 1999. The remaining $75 million in competitive grants
 would be available for innovative projects to help the hardest to serve welfare recipients get and keep jobs.

 2. Target $200 million for work-focused responsible fatherhood grants. These grants would help
 fathers succeed in the workforce through a combination of retention and rapid re-employment services and
 work-based skill upgrading. Only fathers who are fulfilling their child support obligations would be
 eligible for these services. Fathers participating in employment activities could also take part in efforts
 designed to increase the involvement of fathers in their children's lives. As an alternative funding source,
 we could allow the states to transfer up to a certain portion of their T ANF block grants for such fathers
 programs and leave these funds as general Welfare-to-Work formula grants.

                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
amendments to direct more formula funds to the highest poverty areas, increase funds for tribes, improve
eligibility criteria if current factors prove an impediment, and encourage services for two-parent families
(many of whom face issues related to literacy, substance abuse and disabilities).

Increase Employment Opportunities for Individuals with Low Literacy Levels

         Historically, individuals with low education levels have remained on welfare longer, and there is
an increasing concentration of individuals with English language barriers on the welfare rolls in some
places. Policies we are considering include:

1. Workplace. a new tax credit and/or Federal grants to encourage employers to provide adult basic
education classes at the worksite, and setting aside funds for work-based literacy projects within
Welfare-to-Work competitive grants (this would not require new legislation)

2. Community. Expanding the infrastructure and funding for adult basic education through the Adult
Education program, encouraging the development of programs focused on easing the transition to the U.S.
for new immigrants (through ESL and civics classes), subsidizing the provision of child care on college
campuses and other adult education sites, and launching a national information campaign to make people
aware of the problem of functional illiteracy and of available services;

3. Home. Using the new Learning Anytime Anywhere Partnerships to create software for adult basic
education using $200 computers (e.g., WebTV, game players) and subsidizing public housing projects that
create computer literacy programs.]

Expand employment-focused substance abuse treatment

          Various estimates show at least 20 percent of welfare recipient have substance abuse issues, and
this percentage rises within those remaining on the rolls. In general, programs that effectively integrate
treatment and welfare to work efforts, and knowledge about how to do so, are both lacking, although a
handful of states have developed innovative approaches. To encourage these efforts we should (l) Push to
maintain the SAMSHA block grant increase we obtained in FY 1999 and (2) Target a portion of
SAMSHA capacity grants to innovative programs that effectively combine treatment and work. This
initiative would be accompanied by a technical assistancelbest practices effort for states and communities,
jointly funded and managed by DOL, SAMHSA and ACF. (Cost: it is not yet clear whether we should
request additional treatment funds for this purpose. $1 million for technical assistance).

Increase Employment Opportunities for Individuals with Disabilities

      There are a significant number of things we can do to help people with disabilities who are on
TANF, SSI, or ssm go to work, in addition to setting aside Welfare-to-Work competitive grant funds.

1. New BRIDGE grant program. In March, you issued an Executive Order directing the federal
agencies to create a coordinated and aggressive national policy to increase employment of adults with
disabilities. The "Building Resources for Individuals with Disabilities toGain Employment" ("BRIDGE")
program is one of several new proposals to grow out of this effort. BRIDGE is a competitive grant
program designed to increase the employment rate of adults with disabilities by fostering integration at the
local level of employment-related services and support services to adults with disabilities. (Cost: $750



                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


    million over 5 years)

    2. Information and Communication Technologies for People with Disabilities. NEC has developed
    draft proposals now being vetted to ensure that new technologies will be designed from the beginning to be
    accessible to people with disabilities. Ideas include leveraging federal government procurement, investing
    in R&D, funding industry consortia, training the next generation of engineers (NEC will provide a more
    detailed write up.)

    3. Expanding the Defense Department's "CAP" program. The Defense Department's Computer
    Accommodations Program ("CAP") purchases equipment for DOD employees with disabilities to allows
    them to keep working if they become disabled, or for new employees just joining the workforce. By using
    a central $2 million fund for such purchases, individual offices do not have to bear the cost within their
    own budgets, and are less likely to be deterred from hiring a person with a disability. Making this
    program available to other agencies has the strong support of the Administration's appointees with
    disabilities, in particular for Tony Coelho, chair of the President's Committee on Employment of People
    with Disabilities. (Cost $10-$25 million over five years).

    4. Kennedy-JeffordslEmployment-Related Tax Credit. In addition, the Kennedy-Jeffords legislation,
    described in the health section, will playa critical role increasing access to health care for people with
    disabilities returning to work.

    Full Funding for Job Access and Reverse Commute Grants.

             The Omnibus Budget Act appropriated $75 million for FY 1999 ($25 million above the FY 1999
    guaranteed funding level). TEA-21 set guaranteed funding from the Highway Trust Fund at $75 million
    for FY 2000. DOT has requested $150 million in its FY 2000 budget. We may also want to pursue a
    legislative change to the way funds flow to tribal areas -- currently, states must select tribes as applicants.

    Child Support Law Enforcement Initiative

             This initiative will increase the prosecution of egregious child support violators by
    establishing multi-agency investigative teams to identify, analyze, and investigate cases for
    prosecution. This investigative effort will result in more cases being referred to the U.S. Attorney
    offices ready to prosecute. HHS's Office of Child Support Enforcement, Office of the Inspector
    General, and Office of Investigations, working with state and local law enforcement and child
    support agencies, have already launched a pilot project in Columbus Ohio, which will cover 5 states
    (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, and Ohio). This proposal would put these units in place all
    across the nation within the next several years. Additionally, it would provide paralegals dedicated
    to child support cases to the 83 U.S. Attorneys offices that do not now have them. In July, you
    signed into law the Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, creating two new categories of felonies for
    the most egregious child support evaders. (Cost: about $10 million over 5 years).

    Exclude from Medicare Doctors that Owe Child Support

             We should make the following health related child support proposals: 1) to exclude doctors and
    other providers who are delinquent in child support from the Medicare program, i.e., don't allow them to
    bill services to Medicare and 2) provide health professional loans only to those who attest that they do not
    owe child support. Both changes would require legislation.


                                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


