RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 18:53:57.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT INITIATIVES

Access to Capital and Credit

1.   CDFI Tax Credit. We are looking at a proposal to extend tax
incentives to encourage investment in CDFls, which would leverage
additional private investment in distressed areas and stimulate the
economic revitalization of those areas. Under the proposal, $100 million
in non-refundable tax credits would be made available to the CDFI Fund to
allocate among equity investors in qualified CDFls using a competitive
process.  One downside with this proposal is that it would neither assist
non-profit CDFls nor those that issue stock, such as mutual organizations.

2. Microcredit Initiative. We are working to identify means to amplify
Administration support for microenterprise finance -- both domestically
and internationally. We are examining whether to build on Senators
KennedyD,s and DomeniciD,s PRIME legislation which would provide technical
assistance to microenterprise. We are also looking at increased funding
for CDFI initiatives specifically targeted to microenterprise, and CRA and
other regulatory reform designed to enhance bank lending to
microenterprise funds.  On the international side, we are looking at
whether we can increase microenterprise funding for USAID or through MDBs
(either as a direct appropriation or potentially more innovative means,
e.g., "debt for development" swaps), some portions of which may come under
the aegis of support for countries hardest hit by the financial crisis.

Creating Jobs/Making Work Pay

1.   Clean Water, Parks, and Communities Bonds.   We are examining three
potential proposals to encourage "green" infrastructure projects. The
first model uses the same financing mechanism as your school construction
proposal -- providing tax credits to state and local areas on their bond
authority -- to provide incentives to communities to clean up the
environment.  This proposal would cost about $1 billion over five years
and would leverage about $4-$5 billion in environmental investments.
Communities could issue these zero-interest bonds for a menu of projects:
protecting and improving water quality; cleanup of contaminated sediments;
waterfront reclamation and revitalization; stormwater runoff control;
purchasing of green spaces to prevent sprawl; park enhancements and
revitalization, and brownfields cleanup.  The second model, which provides
a smaller incentive than the first model, would create new tax-exempt bond
authority for these state and local areas to invest in clean water, parks,
and communities. The advantage of this model is that it builds on the
current system of bond finance.  The final model would allocate tax
credits (like the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit) to states and local areas


to provide to the developers of these green infrastructure projects.

2. Re-Develop 10,000 Abandoned Buildings. Just as 100,000 teachers and
100; 000 cops provides. an important symbol of government action - - as well
as good policy -- we are examining different proposals to help re-develop
10,000 abandoned buildings. One option would be to explore whether we can
combine several existing programs to meet this goal. Another option would
be to provide grants or tax incentives to spur private-sector
redevelopment of these abandoned buildings. One concern that has been
raised so far is the potential prohibitive cost and return on this type of
effort.

3.   Employment Tax Credits. The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and
the Welfare-To-Work Tax Credit (WTW) will expire on June 30, 1999.   We
believe that the credits may be under-utilized because many employers do
not have the assurance that the credit will be there when they file their
taxes.  Therefore, we are considering whether to make these two tax
credits permanent.


Affordable Housing and Promoting Homeownership for All Americans

1. Expansion of Low-Income Housing Tax Credit.   Last year, you proposed a
40-percent expansion of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) to spur
the private-sector to develop more affordable rental housing for
low-income Americans. However, Congress failed to act despite large
bipartisan support in both the House and the Senate. We recommend you
re-propose increasing the cap on the LIHTC from $1.25 per capita to $1.75
per capita. This proposal would restore the value of the credit to its
1986 level and will help develop an additional 150,000-180,000 affordable
housing units over the next five years.  This proposal would cost $1.6
billion over five years.

2.   Homeownership Tax Credit. We are examining two different types of
tax credits to promote homeownership among lower-income families, who
generally do not benefit from the mortgage interest deduction. The first
proposal would use the model of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit to cr
eate a Low-Income Homeownership Tax Credit. Under this proposal,
low-income families would receive a low- or zero-interest second mortgage,
which would reduce their upfront costs (e.g., downpayment and closing
costs) and investors would receive tax credits in return. The second
proposal is a $5,000 tax credit for first-time homebuyers in Empowerment
Zones or Enterprise Communities.   (The 1997 Balanced Budget Act included a
similar proposal for first-time homebuyers in the District of Columbia.)
We are analyzing both of these proposals to see which one most effectively
reduces barriers to homeowners hip among lower-income families, while being
fiscally sound.

3.    Expansion of Private Activity Bond Cap/Mortgage Revenue Bonds.
Within their volume cap, states and local government may issue tax-exempt
bonds for a variety of purposes.   State and local governments use about
one-third of their private activity bond allocation for mortgage revenue
bonds (MRBs), which helps state and local areas provide below-market
mortgages to first-time homebuyers with relatively low incomes. The
volume cap on private activity bonds, and thus MRBs, has not changed since
1986.   Most community development groups view private activity bonds as
yours, since you were the one who permanently extended it in 1993.    If
Congress acts this year to increase the cap -- which is likely since it is
supported by a majority of both houses -- we are concerned that you may
lose this issue as one of your legacies.   Therefore, we are looking to


accelerate the increase in the cap that was included in this yearO,s
budget agreement. Treasury estimates that a 50-percent increase in 2000
-- which would restore its value to its 1986 level -- would cost $500
million over five years.

4.   Incremental Tenant-based Section 8 Vouchers.  In order to build on
the success of securing new incremental vouchers last year, we recommend
seeking an additional 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers and another
25,000 units to meet the needs of the homeless, including elderly homeless
and homeless veterans.

5.   Regional Affordable Housing Initiative. We are examining whether to
propose a Regional Affordable Housing Initiative (RAHI) as a competitive
pilot program. This proposal would be designed to result in a more
balanced distribution of affordable housing across participating
metropolitan regions.  In particular, the program seeks to increase the
availability of affordable housing in areas with high growth in
low-skilled jobs and inadequate supplies of housing for low-income
workers.  This proposal could be funded through HUDO,s HOME program and w
ould cost $125 million over five years.

6.   Elderly Housing Initiative. This proposal includes a three-pronged
approach to tackle the needs for elderly housing. This initiative would
provide new capital to improve the quality of elderly housing, meet the
changing needs of elderly residents and provide an alternative to nursing
home care -- such as assisted living. One interesting part of this
initiative would be to provide housing vouchers targeted specifically to
very-low income elderly who live in Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
developed housing. Because the tax credit helps subsidize rent, this
proposal would allow us to leverage our resources and provide more
vouchers to the poor elderly.


