  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-NOV-199B 12:24:25.00·

  SUBJECT:   SOTU Mem

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]   )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
  ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

  TEXT:
  Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D16]MAIL47710401N.326 to ASCII,
   The following is a HEX DUMP:

  FF575043D6040000010A020100000002050000002F6A0000000200005E4D6EB9D965CB9265B5BC
  B090AD9ED2321FA16DC5BOE3EF3A5BOOBC1EF37B947887815B47F169A696D79774EC49D50E12B8
  BDD07E02FD53C9ABDD455B7E163FA6C373F8250A194E28A144AE6475671COBB39431EF88FEF45D
  CABIC13DC64A249BBB39BCFOE6BF637361339B5A574548D01E2FAIBA33EB681219B4F0879347FE

FROM:

SUBJECT:                      State of the Union Ideas



EDUCATION AND TRAINING INITIATIVES

1.   Partnership for a Literate America. According to the National Adult Literacy Survey,
44 million adults struggle with a job application, cannot read to their children, or are left on the
welfare rolls because they lack basic skills. We are considering: (1) Workplace: a new tax credit
and/or Federal grants to encourage employers to provide adult basic education classes at the
worksite, and setting aside funds for work-based literacy projects within Welfare-to-Work
competitive grants (this would not require new legislation); (2) Community: expanding the
infrastructure and funding for adult basic education through the Adult Education program,
encouraging the development of programs focused on easing the transition to the U.S. for new
immigrants (through ESL and civics classes), subsidizing the provision of child care on college
campuses and other adult education sites, and launching a national information campaign to
make people aware of the problem of functional illiteracy and of available services; and (3)
Home: using the new Learning Anytime Anywhere Partnerships to create software for adult basic
education using $200 computers (e.g., WebTV, game players) and subsidizing public housing
projects that create computer literacy programs.

2. National Campaign to Open Doors of College. Notwithstanding enonnous strides we
have made in reducing the financial barriers to college, too many families assume college is more
expensive than it really is and are not aware of the aid that is available (Even among low-income
youth with high test scores, one-fourth say they have not been able to get much infonnation about
financial aid for college). We are planning: (1) launching a major national public infonnation
campaign about college costs and financial aid (e.g. naming a national chainnan such as Bill
Cosby, having a national college visit day, etc.), (2) building on the authority in the new GEAR
UP program, providing every middle school (e.g. 7th grade counselor) with the ability to give
students a "21 st Century Scholar Certificate," indicating the financial aid that they are eligible
for, and (3) seeking to provide every high-poverty middle school with a college partner. This
does not require any new investment. just some focus and creativity.

3.   Improving the College Success Rate. Getting people in the doors of college is not
enough to close the racial and income opportunity gaps. For example, only 21 % of
African-American and 18% of Hispanic students who begin college complete a bachelor's degree
within 5 years compared to 30% of White students. We are considering a package of policies to
increase degree attainment among low-income and minority students, including: (1) a super-Pell
grant for the lowest income families and/or to encourage a full-time focus on school in the first
year of college (this would be expensive); (2) expanding successful mentoring and other support


                                                           Automated Records Management SystelTl
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
course-taking while in high school; (4) improving articulation between two-year and four-year
colleges; (5) encouraging partnerships between predominately minority-serving and
predominately majority-serving institutions of higher education (particularly to promote graduate
study); and (6) establishing a bridge fellowship program for graduate study in science and
technology fields for minorities and women.

4. School Modernization. The current assumption is that we will repeat this year's proposal
for tax credits to build and renovate schools covering the interest on nearly $22 billion in bonds.
We are however, critically comparing our current proposal against other possible mechanisms to
ensure we have the most effective approach.

5. Further Expanding Junior ROTC. [This has not been vetted outside the WH] In response
to the Los Angeles riots, Colin Powell proposed and Congress approved in 1992 an expansion of
the high school-based IROTe. Since then, 1,000 units have been added primarily in urban
areas, bringing the total to 2,600 units with 380,000 participants. The budget increased over that
period from $76 million to $166 million. There is a waiting list of more than 450 schools that
would like to have a IROTC unit. Because DOD does not plan any further expansion, these 450
schools on the waiting list will not likely be added. We could propose adding another 900 units
over the next few years, to reach the authorized maximum 0[3,500. The initial expansion could
be accomplished by using a portion of the increase in the current (FY 99) DOD budget.

6. Training American Workers for Current and Future Skills Gaps. We should also
challenge the private sector to make specific commitments to train more American
workers, which they pledged to do during the debate on HI-B visas. They could provide
more college scholarships for women and minorities, partner with community colleges to
develop cutting-edge curricula, and encourage their employees to serve as telementors for
middle school students to get them excited about math and science. In addition, we are
working on: (1) a program to foster partnerships ("Regional Skills Alliances") between industry
and training providers to train both employed and unemployed workers; (2) competitive grants to
encourage companies to develop programs in which they subsidize the training of individuals
who they then commit to hire; (3) extensions and/or expansions of some of the current training
tax provisions (such as the lifelong learning tax credit and Section 127); (4) a major
informational/media campaign by the Departments of Education and Labor to inform all
Americans about available training opportunities, financial aid, andjob search assistance to allow
them to develop the skills required for employment opportunities around th.e country; (5) the
adult literacy initiative described above; and (6) the "Improving the College Success Rate"
initiative described above.

7. Making Job Training Universal. We are considering an initiative to make job training
more universal. The first component of this initiative would be to seek a significant increase in
dislocated worker funding -- about $190 million -- so that we were on path to provide training to
every dislocated worker who wants or needs it within five years. The second component would
be to ensure that job search assistance was available for every unemployed person. The final
component would be to take the steps necessary to ensure that every worker, regardless of where

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
job training, employment service activities, unemployment insurance, vocational rehabilitation,
adult education, and other assistance.)

TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVES

1. Curbcuts on the Information Highway. We are looking at several options that would
make information technology usable by people with disabilities in a manner that improves
their lives: (1) investing in R&D (e.g., text-to-speech, automatic captioning, speech
recognition); (2) giving disabilities groups a seat at the table as the standards for new
technologies are developed; and (3) making the government a model "user" of accessible
technology. In addition, the tax credit for work-related impairment expenses for people
with disabilities could be used to expand the market for assistive technology.

2. Smart Health Care. Advances in computer-based patient records are needed in two areas:
(1) only authorized personnel should have access to them to protect privacy (if Congress does not
pass legislation this year, the Secretary of HHS is authorized to issue regulations); and (2) after
the doctor enters the symptoms or diagnosis, the system should automatically identify for doctors
and patients the latest medical research that could help save or improve a patient's life. We
could also support demonstration projects in hospitals around the country that would be linked to
major medical centers. Another initiative is to promote the availability of computers for
bedridden patients to allow them to communicate with friends and relatives or to stay in touch
with their jobs or education.

3. A Digital Library for Science, Math and Engineering. We need to get every young
student and undergraduate excited about math, science and engineering. One approach we are
exploring is creating a "digital library," which would contain lectures from Nobel Prize laureates,
have an ability to track and replicate cutting-edge scientific experiments, and make it easier for
students and teachers to locate the best instructional material on the Internet.

4. A User-Friendly Information Age Government. American citizens should not have to
learn the "org chart" of the federal government. Building on the efforts of the Vice President's
"reinventing government" activities, the Administration will be developing a series of "one stop
shops" that tie together the most useful information and on-line transactions for students, senior
citizens, exporters, and small businesses.

5. Information Technology Research Initiative. Increasing our investment in information
technology research, which is currently about $1 billion of the federal research budget, could lead
to the following breakthroughs: supercomputers that can more rapidly perform important
functions, such as designing life-saving drugs and predicting severe weather systems; wireless
networks that can bring telemedicine and distance learning to rural America; a device of the size
of a paper that could monitor the vital signs of a senior citizen, send a "911" message in the event
of a medical emergency, and provide an exact location using global positioning technology; new
software tools that can help us cope with "information overload" by discovering patterns in huge
quantities of data; and intelligent spacecraft that can explore the Solar System. Options have

                                                        Automated Records Management System.
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
over 5 years.

6. 21st Century Research Fund. One initiative that you announced in last year's budget that
we think is important to continue is the 21 st Century Research Fund -- which provided
across-the-board support for civilian R&D at agencies such as NIH, NSF, and Energy. This
year, Congress provided a 10 percent increase for basic research, so this is an area where
bipartisan cooperation is possible.

PENSION INITIATIVES

1. Expanded Private Pension Plan Coverage: Last year, you announced several initiatives
to expand pension plan coverage which were not enacted, but which we continue to believe are
important and have substantial support on the Hill. We should again call for legislation that:
authorizes a simplified plan for small businesses that combines the best features of a defined
benefit and defined contribution plan (SMART), costing $313 million over five years; provides a
three-year tax credit to encourage small businesses to set up retirement programs, costing $508
million over five years; and authorizes payroll deductions for IRAs. We are exploring ways to
expand coverage for moderate and lower-income workers. Consideration is also being given to
ways of enabling mUltiple small businesses to pool together for pension plan administration.

2. Women's Retirement Security: To underscore the importance of pensions for women's
retirement security, you would call for legislation enacting the two initiatives you announced in
late October -- namely, that time taken under FMLA should count toward retirement plan vesting
requirements and mandating that employer plans offer an option that pays less while the retired
employee is living but pays a survivor benefit equal to at least 75 percent of the benefit the
couple received while both were alive.

3. Pension Portability: You could renew your call for reducing vesting requirements from five
years to three years for employer matching contributions to 401(k) and other plans to reflect an
increasingly mobile workforce, and more workers moving in and out of the workforce over a
lifetime. We are also exploring various options that would increase pension portability and
facilitate the movement of retirement savings between plans, where this can be done without
encouraging "leakage" or loss of worker protections -- e.g., providing that federal employees can
roll over retirement savings from private sector qualified plans into the federal Thrift Savings Plan.

4. Expand Pension Right to Know Provisions: You could call for a pension right to know
package that provides for both workers and their spouses general information relating to
retirement needs and their benefits under employer retirement plans. In addition, an employee's
spouse should have the same rights to get information as the employee, before waiving the
statutorily provided survivor protection. You should call for a Pension Right to Know package
that provides information for both workers and their spouses. We are also working on an
employee education program that would provide employees with the tools they need to work
with their employers to provide pension plans, and are thinking about how to encourage courses
in high schools on the importance of savings and other general investment education (which can

                                                         Automated Records Management S) stem
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
Consideration is also being given to a savings stamp book program in the schools (sell savings
stamps in very small amounts; when the book is full, tum it in for a U.S. savings bond) to help
educate the young about how to reach savings goals.

5. Increase Retirement Security: To promote security, we are continuing to work on the
pension audit bill, changes to the multi employer (collectively bargained) plan rules, and
expansion ofPBGC's missing participant program.

FINANCIAL SERVICES INITIATIVES

1. Consumer Financial Literacy and Education. We are currently developing a set of
proposals to promote consumer financial awareness and enhance consumer credit literacy,
ranging from a public awareness campaign to establishing an educational clearinghouse to
disseminate quality curricula to high school students. We are also working on a study to
identify what the biggest problems are with how Americans use consumer credit, and what
basic banking services and steps they can take to help themselves (this may be very
important if bankruptcy reform is a live item next year). Part of our focus is on reaching
out to low-income households, building on (and expanding) two existing government
programs -- Treasury's Electronic Funds Transfer program that was a first step in helping
the "unbanked" enter into electronic commerce and a USDA extension program that is
providing some (limited) services to rural low-income families. This proposal would cost
$5-10 million.

2. Consumer Financial Bill of Rights. In order to respond to the outrage consumers feel
about ATM surcharges, without supporting economically questionable regulation of ATM
fees, we are considering a proposal either for the government or for financial institutions
voluntarily to make publicly available a list of basic banking services and fees on an
individual or geographic basis to be published 'periodically over the Internet. The services
profiled would include, but would not be limited to, charges for access to ATMs. We are
also considering the adequacy of current credit card disclosure requirements (again,
relevant to bankruptcy reform) and other areas where information about financial service
arrangements would be helpful to consumers. This would cost $3-5 million.

TRANSPORTATION INITIATIVES

1. Reauthorization of the FAA, with Focus on Modernization and Competiton. A
blue-ribbon panel concluded last year that the air transportation system faces "gridlock"
within a decade without sweeping changes. We are considering various policy options to
incorporate into the FAA reauthorization that you will likely propose in 1999 that will: (1)
improve the efficiency and capacity of the nation's aviation system, and (2) enhance
competition and service to rural areas. Some of the components of this initiative would
include: centralizing the air traffic control services (ATS) in a performance-based
organization; financing ATS for commercial aviation through cost-based user fees;
increasing Passenger Facility Charges (PFCs) to finance airport expansion nationwide;

                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
airline entrants; enhancing service to underserved areas.

We are also looking at ways to further competition -in international aviation. The
Administration has extended the benefits of competition by negotiating dozens of bilateral
open-skies agreements. We could press our trading partners for World Wide Open Skies
and explore lifting other restrictions on foreign aviation investment and operation on a
reciprocal basis.

2. Auto Safety. We are making headway on auto safety. Last year, the number and rate
of auto fatalities declined. However, we still have a long way to go -- more than 40,000
Americans die in auto accidents each year, at a direct cost of $150 billion. The keys are
seatbelts (more) and alcohol (less). We are working on a comprehensive initiative that
would include: (1) meeting the President's goal of 85 percent seatbelt compliance by the
year 2000, which would save 4,000 lives and nearly $7 billion; (2) promoting education
initiatives like the Buckle-Up America campaign; (3) enforcing the TEA-21 requirement
that states lower the legal blood alcohol content level from .10 to .08; and (4) pushing a new
Administration initiative on children's safety that will target auto accidents, among other
problems, by promoting the use of child safety seats, booster seats (for children ages 4-8),
and bicycle helmets.

3. Transportation Needs of the Aged. With the number of Americans over 65 expected to
grow by half by 2020, we should begin addressing the need to ensure their continued
mobility, independence and safety in their later years. We are only beginning to look at
this issue with DOT, which plans to hold six town meetings soon with senior citizens,
medical experts, transportation safety specialists, and others to discuss the problems and
challenges and identify best practices. The U.S. will host an international conference on
this topic next year, in connection with the United Nation's Year of Older Persons. This
may be combined with the long-term care and the housing for the elderly initiatives.

4. Sustainable Development and "Smart Growth." Sensible, flexible transportation
initiatives can improve both our economy and our quality of life. First, we will continue
investing in sustainable transportation. TEA-21 authorizes a record $41 billion over the
next six years for transit; increases tax-free transit benefits; and expands communities'
ability to transfer funds from highway construction to transit, bicycle and pedestrian
programs, telecommuting and other forms of transportation that reduce congestion and
pollution. Second, we need to empower communities to make smart choices, choosing the
right transportation investments for their needs. As result of a new policy DOT
announced in April, communities can now use federal funds to clean and reuse
"brown fields," preserving farms and forests for the future. Third, we need to make
communities more livable, with support for low-cost projects with big quality-of-Iife
benefits, such as bicycle paths and historic preservation.

ENERGY/ENVIRONMENT
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
that will be forwarded to you by CEQ in a separate memorandum and the community
empowerment environmental initiatives mentioned above, you would call on Congress to
enact the electricity restructuring legislation Act, to make the electricity industry more
competitive and to provide more choices for industrial, commercial and residential
customers. The Administration's Comprehensive Electricity Competition Act will save
consumers $20 billion a year. Retail competition will not only improve efficiency, but
also reduce the two-thirds waste of energy currently associated with fossil-fuel generation
of electricity, thereby cutting greenhouse gas emissions.

2. Distributed Generation ("Micropower"). To increase the consumer savings and
environmental benefits from electricity competition, the Administration will pursue
legislation to eliminate obstacles to the use of small, clean efficient generation technologies
(e.g., fuel cells and photovoltaics) that can be installed at or near the electricity user's site.
Moving from large, central-station generation of electricity to distributed generation by
small, clean sources is analogous to the move from mainframe computers to personal
computers.

RURAL/AGRICUL TURE

1. Strengthening the Safety Net. To help farmers suffering from the depressed export
markets and natural disasters, we are considering various reforms of the crop insurance
program and closing gaps I the emergency loan program. We are having to focus on small
family farms.

2. Food Safety [DPC has material]. On partnerships between federal, state, and local
agencies; and continued surveillance for food borne diseases.

3. Streamline School Lunch Program. We are working on consolidating all the different
Child Nutrition Programs so we have just two: one for schools, and one for community
based child care.       The paperwork requirements would be simplified; nutrition
requirements and funding levels would remain the same. And nutrition education would
be an integral part of both meals and curriculum, tailored to every age group.

4. Bringing the knowledge of land grant colleges to every rural American: The USDA
spends $1.6 billion on agricultural research, much of it at America's land grant colleges
and universities. The government could provide grants to ensure that this information is
available on the Internet and is well-organized --so that all rural Americans can easily
access information on topics such as crops, livestock, rural development, natural resource
conservation, and food safety.



                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


