RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-NOV-1998 12:36:07.00

SUBJECT:   In case you missed it

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
fyi ... looks like we picked up our first Republican vote ... well, maybe ... jc3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 11/09/98
12:34 PM ---------------------------




Jordan Tamagni
11/09/98 12:30:34 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         In case you missed it

        SEN.-ELECT SCHUMER: Well, I think the message was: D&Get on with
               the business of making our lives better. Talk about things
like making our schools
               better and reigning in HMOs, and preserving Social
Security, and making the
               streets safe.DS I found, TimD*I agree with the senator on
this issue that there
               was no difference among people in different parts of the
state, different
               ethnicities. What they wanted us to focus on were practical
things that made
               their lives better.

                         MR. RUSSERT: Now, the president of the United States
spoke about a
               practical thing yesterday in his radio address to the
nation. He said that thereD,s
               been a loophole, that people can go to gun shows and buy
guns without
               background checks. Would you support President Clinton on
that, Senator
               Fitzgerald?

                         SEN.-ELECT FITZGERALD: Well, I think I probably
would. I think
               anything we can do to keep guns out of the hands of
criminals, convicted felons,


               makes sense. There is a lot of evidence that the Brady bill
itself, which heD,s
               trying to say has some more loopholes in it, has prevented
a lot of criminals from
               obtaining guns. And I think thatD,s what we need to be
looking at doing to prevent
               criminals from getting their hands on guns.

                      MR. RUSSERT: So if people go to gun shows and buy a
gun, they should
               have the same background check as if they went to a gun
shop?

                         SEN.-ELECT FITZGERALD: Right. I mean, why should a
criminal or a
                  convicted felon be able to go obtain a gun at a gun show?

                        MR. RUSSERT: There was a big debate in Illinois when
you ran about
               concealed weapons, whether or not people should be able to
conceal a gun. You
               think they should. Why?

                         SEN.-ELECT FITZGERALD: Well, first of all, that bill
was grossly
               distorted. That bill did not repeal our stateD,s
prohibition against citizens carrying
               concealed weapons. I support that prohibition. What that
bill did was it created
               an exemption that applied to a very small number of people
under a very limited
               set of circumstances, and the bill didnD,t even apply in
the city of Chicago. And I
               was able to explain that well, and, of course, my opponent
had opposed
               mandatory minimum sentences for criminals who used guns to
commit crimes.

                      MR. RUSSERT: But you donD,t think that concealed
weapons should be a
               national policy?

                      SEN.-ELECT FITZGERALD: Oh, absolutely not. In fact,
itO,s a state issue,
               I guess, 31 states have some form of legislation, licensure
legislation, in that
               regard, but itO,s not a federal issue at all.

                       MR. RUSSERT: Senator-Elect Schumer, youD,ve been
outspoken on gun
               control. What can the nation expect in terms of that debate
in the coming
               months?

                         SEN.-ELECT SCHUMER: Well,   ID,d like to see the issue
move forward.
                  There are certain things that can be done without impinging
on the right of
               legitimate gun owners. An obvious one is trigger locks on
guns, which some of


               the major gun manufacturers have already put voluntarily on
their guns. This
               would prevent children from getting hold of guns and the
tragedies that occurred
               in Arkansas .and Oregon.

                       The second thing that IO,d like to see move forward
is something called 0&12
               is enough for one gun a month.08 In Senator FitzgeraldO,s
city of Chicago and my
               city of New York and cities throughout the country, gun
runners buy 50 or 60
               cheap Saturday Night Specials or 100 of these little cheap
handguns. They put
               them in the trunk of their car. They buy them in states
that have no gun control
               laws or virtually none, drive them up to the cities and
sell them to kids and
               criminals. If you limited the amount of guns that could be
bought at a time to one
               a month, you could stop that. ThatO,s, again, something
that doesnO,t hurt the
               average hunter or a person who uses a gun for sport, but
would prevent the
               criminals and kids from getting guns.

                       MR. RUSSERT: Senator-Elect Fitzgerald, could you buy
into that, one gun
                a month, and also trigger locks on guns that prevent kids
from misfiring?

                      SEN.-ELECT FITZGERALD: Well, IO,ve supported trigger
locks and I
                would take a look at Senator- Elect SchumerO,s proposal in
that regard. I do
                agree that to the extent we can focus on keeping guns out
of the hands of
                criminals and convicted felons and mentally unstable
individuals, yet preserve the
                constitutional rights of law-abiding citizens to defend
themselves and their
                families, thatO,s the appropriate focus of our gun control
laws.


