RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.     ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-NOV-1998 11:53:30.00

SUBJECT:   CEQ's DRAFT SOTU Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
11/09/98 11:53 AM ---------------------------




Wesley P. Warren
11/06/98 07:42:46 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      Sally Katzen/OPD/EOP, Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         CEQ's DRAFT SOTU Memo

Here is a copy of the draft CEQ State of the Union Memo.   I apologize for
not getting it to you sooner, but our preparation of it slipped as the
overall schedule slipped. We discussed the issue of format with Maria's
office and were told that she expected a separate memo from. CEQ. We
would, however, appreciate your comments once you have a chance to review
the draft.
---------------------- Forwarded by wesley P. Warren/CEQ/EOP on 11/06/98
07:39 PM ---------------------------



Robert S. Kapla
11/06/98 07:00:32 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Clara J. Shin/WHO/EOP
cc:      Wesley P. Warren/CEQ/EOP, Elliot J. Diringer/CEQ/EOP
Subject:         CEQ's DRAFT SOTU Memo




==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================


ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o   00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D23]MAIL453806210.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D4060000010A0201000000020500000099520000000200004B88A709C3604992312EB7
8466B74EFDC04013099612125F1268ABDA24A8C8630989E7CFC5A9E653558B5A357E8608D089D8
AIEBOIF95EB6BAODC69FOB813F7C5CD6011AB46CECB53E3CA8DIFC259FC26EFEEllAE50341A54E


                                       November 6, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          GEORGE T. FRAMPTON, JR.

SUBJECT:       PROPOSED 1999 STATE OF THE UNION INITIATIVES

The following is a set of six potential State of the Union announcements for your consideration.
In some cases, these announcements have more than one part and could be presented as separate,
smaller announcements or packaged into a single, larger announcement.

A LANDS LEGACY

Action: You would announce a broad strategy or a series of targeted initiatives (depending on
available budget) built around a new vision of conservation with the aim of reconnecting people
and the land.

Background: Time and again over the past century, Americans have demonstrated their
commitment to preserving our greatest natural treasures. This Administration has added
immeasurably to this impressive legacy with steps to protect Yellowstone, the red rock canyons
of Utah and California's old-growth redwoods.

Increasingly, though, we face new conservation challenges that call for a new conservation ethic.
Having preserved so many of our "crown jewels" -- places prized precisely because they are
pristine and remote -- we must focus now as well on natural wonders in our very backyards. A
conservation ethic for the 21 st century recognizes people as part of the natural landscape, and
seeks to preserve natural and open spaces in each community, within reach of every citizen.

This approach is implicit in many of the Administration's conservation efforts -- for instance,
Everglades restoration, habitat conservation planning, and acquisition through the Land and
Water Conservation Fund of threatened lands near urban areas. This initiative would more fully
articulate this new conservation vision and set in motion collaborative strategies to fulfill it in
both urban and rural settings.

One vehicle for this initiative is an ambitious proposal by Interior called Partnership for
America's Resources. This proposal would draw on and signficantly expand several existing
funds, including the Land and Water Conservation Fund, and establish new dedicated funding
sources to generate a total of about $3 billion a year through 2009. These funds would support a
wide range of acquisition and restoration programs at the federal, state and local levels. If the
budget were to allow, this proposal would crown the Administration's solid conservation record,

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
century's start.

An alternate approach would be a streamlined version of Interior's proposal that draws as well on
other agencies' resources and incorporates targeted tax incentives. Each element would cultivate
positive connections between people and the land, for instance by promoting sustainable forestry
on private lands, protecting farmland from development, supporting efforts that protect wildlife
while accommodating growth, or ensuring city and suburban dwellers easy access to nature and
open space. The initiatives could include:

       Northern Forests - A collaborative effort with local government, property owners, the
       conservation community and the states of New York, Maine, New Hampshire and
       Vermont to preserve the natural and economic values of the largest contiguous wild forest
       in the eastern United States. Up to 3.5 million acres now owned by timber companies are
       or soon will be for sale. Disposition of this land will have profound impacts on the
       economy and environment of this region.

       Parks and Communities - A collaborative effort with state and local governments and the
       private sector guided by the vision of open space and recreation within walking distance
       of every child in America. Eighty percent of Americans lives in urban areas, and half
       have no park or open space within walking distance of their home. This initiative could
       include a commitment to create or rehabilitate 1000 parks or recreation facilities.

       Farmland Preservation - Tax incentives and increased USDA funding to help preserve
       farmland threatened by development. This is a key component of the livability agenda
       launched by the Vice President, which highlights the close connection between loss of
       prime farmland and runaway sprawl.

       Lewis and Clark National Preserve - Redesignation of a stretch of the Missouri River in
       Montana (now part Wild and Scenic River, part National Wildlife Refuge) to
       commemorate the Lewis and Clark expedition, which explored the area in 1805.

       Conservation Incentives - A targeted tax incentive that reduces tax on capital gains
       realized through transfer of property that will remain under conservation easement.

       Habitat Protection - Increased cost-share funding to acquire habitat in regions
       undertaking comprehensive conservation planning to balance growth and endangered
       species needs (as recently completed in Orange, Riverside and San Diego counties).

Cost: TBD, depending on scope.



                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                               2

Action: You would propose $1 billion in new fundingJo provide low-interest financing for
projects that achieve early reductions in air pollution and/or greenhouse gas emissions,
giving cities and states a significant nonregulatory tool in the fight for cleaner air.

Background: One of the Administration's top environmental accomplishments is the
adoption of tough standards to reduce smog and soot. We also have proposed
strengthening standards to reduce regional haze in the West. While these steps have been
well received by the public, many mayors and governors continue to cite them as
constraints on economic growth. These concerns, which are likely to become more
pronounced as the standards are implemented, stem in part from concerns about the cost
of compliance.

In addition, one of the Administration's top climate change priorities is encouraging early,
voluntary action to reduce greenhouse gases. Again, one barrier is concerns about the
capital investment necessary to achieve these reductions.

In the case of water quality, strong bipartisan majorities in Congress have long supported a
revolving fund to finance state and local infrastructure projects to reduce water pollution.
This proposal would take a similar approach to air emissions. For soot or smog-related
emissions, funding would be made available to states upon demonstration, consistent with
EPA guidelines, that a project woul~ achieve reductions sooner than required, or from
sources not subject to regulation. For greenhouse gas emissions, funding would be made
available upon a demonstration consistent with DOE guidelines that the project would
achieve "early" reductions that otherwise. would not have been made. Guidelines will
ensure that the fund does not compensate polluters for taking action already required by
regulation.

We are reviewing with Treasury a number of possible models for the fund and for
allocating financing, ranging from the existing clean water state revolving funds to the
school-construction model to that used for low-income housing tax credit.

Cost: $1 billion annually in fund capitalization (outlay rates significantly lower, and may be
reduced over time by operation of a cost cap in the President's implementation plan for the
new soot and smog standards). Differential costs of alternative financing mechanisms TBD.


A NEW PARTNERSHIP FOR LAKES AND COASTS

Action: You would launch a new initiative to protect America's coasts and the Great Lakes,
propose new funding to help farmers combat water pollution, and call on Congress to reauthorize
and strengthen the Clean Water Act.


                                              3           Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
solid framework for addressing the next generation of clean water challenges, principally
nonpoint source pollution. This initiative underscores some unfinished business --
reauthorization of the Clean Water Act, and increased funding for farmers -- and targets
additional resources to the specific and urgent needs of the Great Lakes and coastal areas.
Specifically, it would create a dedicated source of funding (subject to state cost-sharing) to
restore wetlands, accelerate cleanup of contaminated sediment, and support local partnerships to
restore estuaries.

Each of these issues has a strong economic component. Along the Gulf Coast, loss of wetlands
raises the risk of catastrophic damage from hurricanes and floods. Sediment contamination
hampers urban redevelopment, damages commercial and recreational fisheries in regions like the
Great Lakes, and undermines the competitiveness of our ports by increasing dredging costs.
Pollution of estuaries destroys commercial fisheries, threatens drinking water, and increases
pollution control costs.

This initiative would: commit an additional $300 million a year to restore wetlands in Louisiana
and other Gulf states (this funding mechanism, a variation on the Landrieu-Dingell proposal, also
would support Everglades restoration); commit an additional $280 million a year for sediment
cleanup and natural resource restoration; and commit an additional $100 million a year to
implement estuary recovery plans developed in partnership with states and local communities.

Cost: $680 million.

In addition, the following proposals could be included in this initiative, or announced before the
State of the Union:

       Save the Colorado Initiative - You would propose funding to remove uranium mine
       tailings in Moab, Utah, that are contaminating endangered species and the Colorado
       River, a major water source for California. The Atlas Corporation, which operated the
       mine, recently filed for bankruptcy, making it inevitable under current law that the
       Department of Energy will bear ultimate responsibility for the cleanup. Democrats and
       RepUblicans in both the California and Utah delegations have united behind Congressman
       George Miller (D-CA) in demanding that the tailings be moved. Governor Leavitt and
       Secretary Babbitt strongly support the proposal. Cost: $125 million over five years,
       assuming Atlas will be able to pay $7 million over the same period.

       Helping Farmers Protect Water Quality - As part of your Clean Water Action Plan, you
       requested $100 million in FY 1999 for a USDA program to help farmers control polluted
       runoff. This funding was denied by Congress. As an alternative, you would announce
       flexible use of Commodity Credit Corporation funds for the same purpose. USDA is
       exploring how much funding could be made available this way. Cost: TBD


                                                4                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Action: You would announce a $100 million-a-year initiative to train former welfare recipients
and other workers for jobs in environmental cleanup and energy efficiency; and to retrain timber
workers, miners and fishermen for environmental restoration work.

Background: One of the overriding themes of the Administration's environmental message is
that a healthy environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. Yet despite notable successes
-- for instance, brownfields cleanup and our Jobs in the Woods program in the Pacific Northwest
-- environmental initiatives are not always seen as being in the interests of organized labor.

This interagency initiative would address these concerns in both urban and rural areas by
providing training for high-paying jobs in emerging environmental fields. In cities, it would train
workers in hazardous waste and brownfields cleanup, and in lead and asbestos abatement (jobs
for which poorly educated workers are often illegally recruited). In rural regions, it would build
on Jobs in the Woods to retrain timber workers in other regions where harvest levels are
projected to decline; retrain fishermen in areas with declining stocks to do habitat restoration;
and train a new generation of mine workers for mine reclamation' and watershed restoration
work. In addition, it would train workers to conduct energy audits and perform other energy
efficiency work in both urban and rural settings.

Cost: $100 million, with a portion funded from the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund.


PRESERVING AND EXPLORING OUR OCEAN FRONTIER

Action: You would announce designation of a new national marine sanctuary, set a goal of
doubling the number of marine sanctuaries over the next 10 years, and propose legislation to
strengthen protections within existing and new sanctuaries.

Background: At the dawn of the 20th century, under the leadership of President Teddy
Roosevelt, America committed itself to a new lands ethic, preserving irreplaceable pieces of our
rich landscape for all time. As we approach the 21st century, a comparable opportunity beckons
off our shores. As you noted in your address to the National Ocean Conference, the oceans are a
vast frontier largely unexplored, and largely unprotected.

Over the past quarter-century, the federal government has created 12 national marine sanctuaries
encompassing 18,000 square miles of coral reefs, kelp forests and other ocean ecosystems that
are home to a variety of endangered marine life. Management plans for each sanctuary are


                                                5               Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
industry, conservationists, and marine scientists. The level of protection varies among the
sanctuaries, with some little more than boundaries on a map.


There is a growing call from the scientific and conservation communities to both strengthen and
expand the sanctuary system. This proposal would meet both objectives. First, you would
announce the designation by the Commerce Department of a new sanctuary. (Prime candidates
include "seamounts" off California, underwater canyons and ledges off Cape Hatteras and
Massachusetts, brine pools and vents in the Gulf of Mexico, and waters off the Northern Mariana
Islands.) Second, you would set a goal of24 sanctuaries -- double the current number -- by 2009.
You could invite Congress to work with the Administration in identifYing areas for designation.
Third, you would propose legislation to set a minimum level of protection within the sanctuaries.

A new exploration venture by the National Geographic Society, in partnership with the Goldman
Foundation, presents an ideal opportunity to amplify our message. Dr. Sylvia Earle, former chief
scientist at NOAA and recently honored as Time Magazine's first Hero of the Earth, will explore
each ofthe existing sanctuaries in state-of-the-art submersibles.

Cost: An additional $6 million in FY 2000, $21 million in FY 2001, and $36 million in FY 2002.


DECLARING WAR ON ASTHMA

Action: You would launch a national campaign to halt the dramatic increase in asthma incidence
and, ultimately, to reduce by half the number of children who die from the disease or suffer
severe symptoms.

Background: Asthma afflicts more than 5.5 million children in America and is the leading cause
of childhood hospitalization. The number of children suffering asthma has doubled in the past 15
years, and the number dying from it has tripled in the last 20 years. Black and Hispanic children
are twice likely as white children to develop the disease.

The Administration has launched several efforts to combat asthma, including tougher air quality
standards and recent grants to universities to establish environmental health research centers.
This initiative would expand successful programs by HHS and EPA to reduce asthma risks in
schools and homes through education. It also would support additional monitoring and research
to better track incidence and develop potential cures.

Cost: $55 million.



                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex·.DlIllIp ConvlIl'9ion
                                               6


