RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kevin S. Moran ( CN=Kevin S. Moran/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:ll-NOV-1998 15:50:27.00

SUBJECT:   Podesta Q&As

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
John is going to meet     with Susan Page and Mara Liason tomorrow for an on
the record interview.       I pulled these Q&As together from materials that
have been circulating     recently.   Can you take a look at them? Are there
any other issues that     you think he should definitely be prepped for?
Thanks a lot for your     time

PRESIDENTD,S AGENDA


Q:      Is the President frustrated that he has not been able to
accomplish more of his agenda? What are his priorities for the coming
months?

A:      If you look at the priorities the President set forth in last
JanuaryD,s State of the Union address, weD,ve achieved some significant
accomplishments.  First, we saved the surplus for the hard work of Social
Security reform early next year.  Second, we made major strides in
renewing our public schools, especially with the historic commitment of
100,000 new teachers to reduce class size in the early grades.  And third,
we made a profound commitment to strengthening our own economy by funding
our share of the IMF and assuming our responsibility in stabilizing the
global economy on which so much of our prosperity depends.

Unfortunately, Republicans in the last Congress killed, at least for now,
several critical priorities, including the PresidentD,s school
rehabilitation and construction proposal, the patients' bill of rights,
tobacco reform, campaign finance reform and the minimum wage.  In the days
to come the President will work hard to conclude this unfinished
business.

The President will also work to build on the achievements of the past
year. He will continue to lead the effort to reserve the surplus until we
can develop a bipartisan plan to reform Social Security. He will build on
our successes to develop policies and programs that ensure a cleaner
environment for our children. And, he will continue to lead efforts to
protect and strengthen the international economy and U.S. economy.




TOBACCO
"




    Q.      What is the AdministrationO,s position on the state tobacco
    settlement that reportedly will be announced later this week?

    A:      We will review the state settlement as soon as it becomes
    available.  From what we know, the settlement is a real step in the right
    direction, and we appreciate the work the state Attorneys General have
    done to hold the tobacco industry to account for marketing their product
    to children. But even with this settlement, there is a great deal left to
    do, and we will continue to push the Congress to enact comprehensive
    legislation to substantially reduce youth smoking.

    Q:      Is it true that the Fourth Circuit denied the AdministrationO,s
    request for a rehearing in the FDA case? WhatO,s the next step for the
    Administration?

    A:      The Fourth Circuit did decline the AdministrationD,s request
    for an en banc review, and the solicitor General has now decided to seek a
    review of the Fourth CircuitD,s decision in the Supreme Court. Any
    further questions on this matter should be directed to the Justice
    Department.

    Q:      will the President propose to increase cigarette taxes, as
    reported in todayD,s Wall Street Journal?

    A:      Absolutely no decisions have been made about what, if anything,
    the PresidentO,s budget will include on tobacco.  Staff members are in the
    process of considering many options, and have made no recommendations of
    any kind to the President. Of course, the President will continue 'to take
    action to reduce youth smoking, but itO,s too early to say what his budget
    will include or what specific tobacco control policies he will call for.

    Q:      If the states settle their tobacco cases for $200 billion, will
    the Administration propose something smaller than the per-pack price
    increase called for in last yearD,s budget?

    A:      It is completely premature to speculate on what the President
    will include in his budget, or on how the settlement will affect the
    PresidentD,s proposals. We have not even seen the state settlement yet,
    and we certainly do not know how many states will opt into it or how large
    it will be.


