RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-NOV-1998 13:14:14.00

SUBJECT:   New Ideas Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
We have a lot of ideas.  I counted 77 subject headings in our memo alone,
and some of those have multiple initiatives under one heading.  CEQ, OSTP,
and Todd add another 15.  If we liked one another, we could reorder all
these into a single memo called "100 Ideas for a New century".  But we
don't really like them, so it's not worth the trouble.  Besides, everyone
would think all the ideas must be small because we have so many of them --
rather than that our brains must be really, really big.

My changes are small:

1) p. 3, #9, subpart (4)   I believe they meant "matriculation between 2
and 4 yr colleges", not "articulation" -- although that might be a more
achievable goal.

2) p. 4, #11:   Wouldn't JROTC make more s.ense as a Service idea?

3) p. 5, #3: In fairness, work-study is a DPC/NEC idea. But if fairness
is any guide, I'm annoyed that we're calling Work-Site Schools a joint
idea.

4) p. 6, #3:  Is Chris also working on any other tax credits as a coverage
expansion idea? Ask him.

5) p. 7, #9: You're probably right -- you might move up Prescription
drugs, and cross reference Tobacco

6) p. 8, Tobacco, new item #3: Medicare Suit Against Tobacco Companies.
Our best leverage over the tobacco industry is the prospect of a federal
suit to recoup Medicare costs associated with smoking.   We should calIon
Congress to enact Sen. Graham's legislation to authorize such a lawsuit
(which would make the Justice Department more likely to bring it). At the
same time, we can ask for funds for Justice and HCFA to prepare a lawsuit
against the tobacco industry. We could go further, and pledge that any
proceeds from such a lawsuit would be used either to extend the life of
the Medicare Trust Fund or to provide a new prescription drug benefit to
Medicare beneficiaries in managed care.   (Cost for lawsuit: TBD, but
probably small.)

7) p. 9, #7:    "smally" should be "a very small"

8) p. 9: Given the mind-numbing quality of many of the ideas in Community
Empowerment, Technology, etc., I would strongly recommend moving up two
sections that read well -- CRIME and PENSIONS.


