RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ]

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-MAY-1997 09:35:28.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Michael Cohen    CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Dear [whomever]

        As America moves into the 21st Century, we must give our people
the strongest education in the world.  No other priority is more important
for our nation.  I cannot sign any legislation that would hinder our
mission of raising standards and giving every American child a world-class
education. Therefore, I will veto the supplemental appropriations bill if
it includes the proposed amendment that seeks to block national
educational standards.

        As I said in my State-of-the-Union Address, America needs
educational standards -- not federal government standards, but national
standards representing what all our students must know to succeed in the
new knowledge economy.  Every state and school must shape its curriculum
to reflect these standards, and train teachers to lift students up to
them.  I have proposed that every state should test 4th graders in
reading, and 8th graders in math, based on widely accepted national
standards. These tests are already used to measure the performance of
states; what we propose is that they. measure the performance of every
student, so parents can learn how their children are doing and how their
own schools measure up.  The Department of Education is already funding
the development of these tests.   Make no mistake: The proposed amendment
would stop in its tracks this national, cooperative effort to develop
meaningful tests.

        Education is the key to our future, and national standards are the
key to improving education. The proposed amendment would effectively block
these national standards.  It would set back the cause of education and
damage the future of our children. ·It must not become law.

        I am determined that all our young people will meet these new
rigorous standards.  That is why, for example, I am so pleased that the
recent budget agreement funds our America Reads challenge, which would
mobilize an army of 1 million volunteer tutors toward our goal of every 8
year old being able to read independently. We must press forward with
other ongoing efforts to help our children learn the basics of reading and
math, and I look forward to working with you in partnership toward these
critical national goals.  But above all, I will not allow our nation to
come to a halt as we move toward effective national standards.

        As you are also aware, I have made clear that I will veto this
legislation if it includes the automatic continuing resolution provision
contained in the senate passed bill.  While I share the goal of ensuring
that Congress does not shut the government down again, such a provision is
inconsistent with our recent bipartisan budget agreement, and is clearly
extraneous to this emergency disaster relief legislation.

        In addition, members of my administration have informed you of
other seriously objectionable provisions that must be addressed before
this legislation reaches my desk.



        This vital legislation contains $5.6 billion in urgently needed
disaster assistance funds for hundreds of thousands of victims of recent
natural disasters in 33 states.  These citizens should not be forced to
wait.  I urge you to pass strong disaster relief and international
peacekeeping supplemental funding, without attaching unrelated and
damaging provisions that can only set this legislation back.




