RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-FEB-1998 10:05:12.00

SUBJECT:   WHITE HOUSE NOTEBOOK: WHITE HOUSE PARTYING INTO WEE HOURS

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/06/98 10:05
AM ---------------------------




Neera Tanden
02/06/98 09:40:27 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         WHITE HOUSE NOTEBOOK: WHITE HOUSE PARTYING INTO WEE HOURS

Fyi - you just need to read the bottom paragraph.
---------------------- Forwarded by Neera Tanden/WHO/EOP on 02/06/98 09:41
AM ----~----------------------



        TANDEN N @ A1
        02/06/98 09:27:00 AM
Record Type: Record

To: Neera Tanden
cc:
Subject: WHITE HOUSE NOTEBOOK: WHITE HOUSE PARTYING INTO WEE HOURS

Date: 02/06/98 Time: 08:42
CWHITE HOUSE NOTEBOOK: White House partying into wee hours

    WASHINGTON (AP)   How do the world's most powerful baby boomers
party? Put a tent atop the White House, invite Elton John and
Stevie Wonder, and dance until morning.
    Like kids at a high-school prom, John, President Clinton, first
lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and Tipper Gore rocked the Grand Foyer
Thursday night, dancing in a circle to Motown tunes and singing at
each other.
    The guests of honor at the hot-ticket White House dinner
Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair and his wife, Cherie    ducked
out just after midnight, but not before a lively concert by John
and Wonder.
    Under a tent set up on the West Colonnade roof, Wonder had his
VIP audience --la, la, la-ing"  along with his songs like
professionals by the end of his half-hour set. Unsatisfied by their
weak first try, Wonder teased, --You're like a library meeting or
something. Helloooo."
    As the clock tipped over into morning, Clinton warned that he
and Mrs. Clinton were ready to keep on partying. --You can stay if
you don't feel you need to go home,"  he said. --But you do have to
get up and work in the morning. No dispensation. ' ,
    By the last dance, actor James Brolin was wearing fiance~ Barbra
Streisand's wine-colored velvet stole. The Clintons headed upstairs
around 1:00 a.m.

     This year's black-tie British invasion was entirely benevolent,
though Clinton reminded his guests that in 1814 "marauding English
soldiers gave new meaning to the term 'global warming' when they
torched the White House."
     Toasting Blair before their dinner of grilled salmon, Clinton
added, "But, Mr. Prime Minister, we are a forgiving people."
Blair sarcastically returned in his own toast that the British have
   come a long way . . . . We're getting the hang of your language."
     From the leaders' joking exchange, to the knowing laughs and
whispers between the two first ladies, the close personal
friendship between the Blairs and the Clintons was obvious.
     Mrs. Clinton and Mrs. Blair even unwittingly dressed in gowns
exactly the same muted shade of gold. "We just think alike!"      Mrs.
Clinton exclaimed.,

    With dinner guests like Streisand, Tom Hanks, Harrison Ford,
Carol Channing, Mir space station veteran Colin Michael Foale, and
Steven Spielberg wandering the White House halls, even the upright
Secret Service was star-struck.
    In one corridor, a Secret Service agent sheepishly asked Ford
for an autograph, then crept behind a pillar furtively to snap the
actor's photo.
    John F. Kennedy Jr. and his wife, Carolyn Bessette, hardly lost
their heads among the famous and powerful. In the receiving line,
Kennedy bowed as he took the first ladies' hands and Bessette
remembered to remove her long evening gloves before shaking the
president's hand.
    Secretary of State Madeleine Albright arrived on the arm of
diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman, longtime companion to the late
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and one White House aide said it was a
second date for the couple.

     For all the glamour and good etiquette", there was murmuring
about the sexual misconduct allegations against Clinton.
     "We elected him president, not pope,"    Streisand said to
reporters who surrounded her.
     " I wish the people who do these illegal leaks and the media who
exploit them would show respect for the right to privacy and
presumption of innocence,"   she said. "After that, it's no one's
business what goes on behind closed doors."
    " I just came to have a nice time, " said Attorney General Janet
Reno, who authorized the independent counsel's probe of Clinton's
alleged affair with an intern.
    Mrs. Clinton deftly headed off any sparks from Sen. Jesse'Helms,
the North Carolina Republican whom she fingered as part of the
"right-wing conspiracy"    behind Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth
Starr's investigation. Before Helms could speak a word to the first
lady, she put out her hand and thanked him for sponsoring a child
care bill    and then turned him over to Mrs. Blair.
APNP-02-06-98 0852EST




EMAILS CREATED     ,



ARMS - BOX 005 - FOLDER 002


[2/6/1998 - 2/24/1998]
