RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 08:32:02.00

SUBJECT:   social promotions

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 05/07/98 08:31
AM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
05/06/98 06:21:50 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         social promotions

Here is the best we could do give the data that are available.  It's a
little softer than I would have preferred; there isn';t a single validated
data sources as much as a series of calls to NGA and similar organizations
that try to track key education policy trends. Let me know what you
think.   We should at least be able to work up some speech language for
this.

Leadership to End Social Promotions. At the 1996 National Education Summit
between governors and business leaders, President Clinton challenged state
and local officials to end the practice of social promotion--the practice
of advancing students to the next grade level regardless of whether they
have met academic standards . . This practice hurts the students who are
promoted by failing to provide them with the help they need to develop a
solid foundation in the basics, and prevents parents and the public at
large from holding schools accountable for results.    The President
reiterated his challenge in his 1998 State of the Union address. Today,
the Action Plan adopted by Mayors responds to that challenge, and calls
for an end to social promotions.    Currently, 10 states have policies
prohibiting the advancement of students who have not met specified
requirements and 5 additional states have legislation pending to eliminate
social promotions.  A growing number of school districts, including
Boston, Cincinnati, Chicago, Long Beach, Rochester, NY, Washington DC, New
York City and Philadelphia also have such pOlicies in place or under
consideration.
