           RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

           CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

           CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1998 10:47:22.00

           SUBJECT:     weekly

           TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ:UNKNOWN

           TEXT:
                    1. Tobacco -- Senate Update: The Senate passed two amendments to the
           McCain bill this week.  The first, sponsored by Senator McCain and
           approved by voice vote, provides $3 billion over five years to the
           VeteransO, Administration to assist veterans with smoking-related
           illnesses. The second, approved by a 66-29 vote, greatly increases the
           surcharges imposed on individual companies that fail to meet youth smoking
           targets. This amendment, supported by most Democrats as well as by those
           Republicans who want to kill tobacco legislation (on the theory that a
           lack of balance will bring the bill down), would impose penalties equaling
           or exceeding anticipated industry profits on a company that has a
           significant youth market and misses its youth reduction targets by 20
           percent.

                   Next week, the Senate is scheduled to consider a proposal by
           Senator Gramm to use tobacco revenues for a tax cut to all married couples
           earning less than $50,000 per year (whether or not they now pay a marriage
           penalty). A prior version of this proposal would have decimated just
           about all other spending immediately, but Gramm reportedly is phasing in
           his amendment to avoid this result.   The latest version would cost $13
           billion over the first four years (28 percent of total receipts), an
           additional $30 billion in the next five years (42 percent of total
           receipts), and $225 billion in the remaining years of the bill (78 percent
           of total receipts).  Even this O&scaled back08 version of the amendment,
           of course, is incompatible with our and the Democratic CaucusO,s spending
           priorities.  For this reason, Senator Daschle has prepared an alternative
           tax amendment, which would provide relief for those married couples
           earning less than $60,000 per year who now pay a marriage penalty, as well
           as accelerating the deductibility of health insurance costs for the
           self-employed. This alternative proposal would cost $11 billion over the
           first four years and would continue to consume between 20 and 25 percent
           of total revenues throughout the lifetime of the bill.   It is conceivable
           that McCain and Senator Kerry will strike a deal with Gramm next week that
           splits the difference between these two proposals.   Such a compromise
           certainly would grease Senate passage of the tobacco bill, but at some
           cost to our public health and research priorities.

                   The Senate also is expected to vote next week on an amendment
           offered by Senators Craig and Coverdell, which would allocate about $2
           billion each year to anti-drug efforts, again cutting into the funding
           available in the bill for'public health and research. The Craig-Coverdell
           amendment also includes a permanent prohibition on the use of federal
           monies for needle exchange and a program to allow education vouchers to
           students who have been the victims of school violence. We are working to
           draft a modified version of the Craig-Coverdell amendment that spends less
           money on anti-drug efforts and eliminates the amendmentO,s poison pills.
           We hope that we will be able to convince a bipartisan group of Senators,
           including McCain and Kerry to support this modified anti-drug amendment.

                   Cloture votes are scheduled for Tuesday and Wednesday, but because
           Senator Lott strenuously opposes cutting off debate at this time, no one
           expects these motions to pass. We are hopeful that by the end of the
 week, the Senate will have dealt with the tax and drug issues, as well as
 the two Republican substitute bills and the farmers provisions, and that
 it then will be ready to vote for final passage.




