RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUN-1998 16:12:54.00

SUBJECT:    REVISED HUD Report on S462,HR 2 Public Housing Reform and Responsibility Act of

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO)     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please print; for some reason, i can't
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 06/22/98 04:22
PM -----.---------------------


From:   Melissa N. Benton on 06/22/98 10:28:38 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      Janet R. Forsgren/OMB/EOP, James C. Murr/OMB/EOP
Subject:         REVISED HUD Report on S462,HR 2 Public Housing Reform and
Responsibility Act of 1997


Total Pages: ____


LRM ID: MNB192
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Monday, June 22, 1998

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                      Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:            Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                PHONE: (202) 395 -7887 FAX: (202) 395 - 614 8
SUBJECT:        REVISED HUD Report on S462,HR 2 Public Housing Reform and
Responsibility Act of 1997

DEADLINE:                COB    Monday, June 22, 1998

In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: To follow is a revised version of the HUD report on Public
Housing Reform, redlined to show the changes that were made in response to
comments received on the first draft.

We understand that significant portions of the public housing legislation
will be attached to the House VA/HUD appropriations bill, which is
scheduled to be marked up by the Appropriations Committee this Thursday.
HUD would like to send its letter before Appropriations Committee action.

The deadline is firm.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

,AGENCIES:
 52-HHS - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760
 7-AGRICULTURE - Marvin Shapiro - (202) 720-1516
 61-JUSTICE - L. Anthony Sutin - (202) 514-2141
 62-LABOR - Robert A. Shapiro - (202) 219-8201
 118-TREASURY - Richard S. Carro - (202) 622-0650
 129-VETERANS AFFAIRS - John H. Thompson - (202) 273-6666
 29-DEFENSE - Samuel T. Brick Jr. - (703) 697-1305
 25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
 59-INTERIOR - Jane Lyder - (202) 208-4371
 51-General Services Administration - William R. Ratchford - (202) 501-0563
 89-0ffice of National Drug Control Policy - John Carnevale - (202) 395-6736
 71-National Council on Disability - Andrew Imparato - (202) 272-2112

EOP:
Michael Deich
Alan B. Rhinesmith
Francis S. Redburn
James F. Jordan
Katherine L. Meredith
Jose Cerda III
Leanne A. Shimabukuro
Diana Fortuna
Andrea Kane
Paul J. Weinstein Jr.
Sarah Rosen
Elena Kagan
Jennifer C. Wagner
Jeffrey A. Farkas
Anil Kakani
Chin-Chin Ip
Barbara A. Menard
Larry R. Matlack
Maureen H. Walsh
Debra J. Bond
Pamela B. VanWie
Joseph F. Lackey Jr.
Maya A. Bernstein
Richard H. Kodl
Winifred Y. Chang
Shelly A. McAllister
Mathew C. Blum
Jonathan D. Breul
Norwood J. Jackson Jr
Broderick Johnson
Kevin P. Cichetti
Kate P. Donovan
Charles E. Kieffer
Lisa Zweig
Joanne Chow
Christopher D. Carroll
Janet R. Forsgren
James C. Murr
LRM ID: MNB192 SUBJECT:    REVISED HUD Report on S462,HR 2 Public Housing
Reform and Responsibility Act of 1997


RESPONSE TO


LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:              Melissa N. Benton Phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                 Office of Management and Budget
                 Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                        (Date)

                                                             (Name)

                                                             (Agency)

                                                             (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

               Concur

               No Objection

               No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

               Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet




Message Sent
TO: __________~--~-------------------------------------------------
Michael Deich/OMB/EOP
Alan B. Rhinesmith/OMB/EOP
Francis S. Redburn/OMB/EOP
James F. Jordan/OMB/EOP
Katherin~ L. Meredith/OMB/EOP
Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP
Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OPD/EOP
Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP
Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
Sarah Rosen/OPD/EOP
Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP


Jennifer C. Wagner/OMB/EOP
Jeffrey A. Farkas/OMB/EOP
Anil Kakani/OMB/EOP
Chin-Chin Ip/OMB/EOP
Barbara A. Menard/OMB/EOP
Larry R. Matlack/OMB/EOP
Maureen H. Walsh/OMB/EOP
Debra J. Bond/OMB/EOP
Pamela B. VanWie/OMB/EOP
Joseph F. Lackey Jr./OMB/EOP
Maya A. Bernstein/OMB/EOP
Richard H. Kodl/OMB/EOP
Winifred Y. Chang/OMB/EOP
Shelly A. McAllister/OMB/EOP
Mathew C. Blum/OMB/EOP
Jonathan D. Breul/OMB/EOP
Norwood J. Jackson Jr/OMB/EOP
Broderick Johnson/WHO/EOP
Kevin P. Cichetti/OMB/EOP
Kate P. Donovan/OMB/EOP
Charles E.Kieffer/OMB/EOP
Lisa Zweig/OMB/EOP
Joanne Chow/OMB/EOP
Christopher D. Carroll/CEA/EOP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
COMMENT
AUTHOR: Stephen I. Holmquist
OPERATOR: Stephen I. Holmquist
COMMENT :
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
Draft 6/19/98        -
 Redlined against Draft 5/1/98

1998 Public Housing Reform Bills

Letter to the Conferees
Dear Conferee:
        I am writing to make you aware of the Administration's views
on the public housing reform legislation you are now considering
in the conference to reconcile S. 462 and H.R. 2. These bills
propose major changes in the public housing and tenant
o
-based
Section 8 programs. Over several years now, both the Congress
and the Administration have put a great deal of thought and hard
work into the pursuit of sound reform legislation. As you move
ahead in the conference, I look forward to our continued
collaboration, so that important and long
o
-overdue reforms may
finally be enacted and implemented.
PRINTER FONT 12_POINT_ROMAN_ITALIC
INTRODUCTION
PRINTER FONT 12_POINT_ROMAN
        The Administration strongly supports the goals of S. 462 and
H.R. 2 -- to streamline and reorganize the Nation's public
housing system in a manner which will benefit public housing
residents, facilitate the efficient use of Federal resources, and


increase accountability to the public.    The Administration also
appreciates the willingness of both the House and Senate to draw
upon management reform and other provisions in the
Administration's bill -- the Public Housing Management Reform Act
of 1997.
         However, the Administration has a number of major concerns
about S. 462 and H.R. 2 which, among other things, require the
Conferees to take the following actions:
?        Provide more targeting of scarce housing assistance to the
neediest families;
?        Delete the H.R. 2 provision allowing "fungibility" to meet
income targeting requirements;
?        Delete or address the serious flaws in H.R. 2's "Home Rule
Flexible Grant Option";
?        Delete the self
o
-sufficiency agreements and the community
work provisions in H.R. 2;
?       Delete the Housing Evaluation and Accreditation Board
created by H.R. 2;


?       Further streamline "PHA Plan" requirements; allow small PHAs
to use operating and capital funds interchangeably; delete
provisions constraining flexibility in the operating subsidy
formula; and make the Drug Elimination Program a
formula
o
-based program;
?       Delete the S. 462 provision authorizing PHAs to obtain
medical information about applicants for housing assistance;
and
?       Delete the provisions of both bills allowing PHAs to set the
payment standard in the tenant
o
-based Section 8 program
higher than the Fair Market Rent established by HUD.
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN ITALIC
SUMMARY OF THE BILLS
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
        The Senate and House bills make permanent a number of
critical reforms that the Administration and the Congress have
been able to achieve only through year
o
-to
o
-year provisions in
appropriations legislation.  Elements of the Senate and House
bills would promote the continuation and strengthening of the
transformation of the public housing and Section 8 programs
already underway, including: (1) replacing the worst public
housing with scattered
o
-site and townhouse developments and with
portable tenant
o
-based assistance, which is achieved through
extending the HOPE VI program, permanently repealing the
one
o
-for
o
-one replacement requirement, and facilitating demolition


of obsolete developments and conversion to tenant
fl
-based
assistance or appropriate site revitalization; (2) turning around
troubled PHAs through the use of various tools, including
mandatory receiverships for chronically troubled PHAs and
enhanced powers afforded to HUD and court
o
-appointed receivers
upon takeover; (3) promoting public housing communities with a
greater income diversity and allowing PHAs to implement rent
policies that encourage and reward work, and are coordinated with
welfare reform; (4) demanding greater household responsibility as
a condition of housing assistance through more vigorous
screening, eviction or subsidy termination, and lease enforcement
provisions; and (5) implementation of several of the
Administration's key management reforms.  Important provisions
for management reform include program consolidation and
streamlining, deregulation of well
o
-managed PHAs and small PHAs,
increased reliance on physical conditions in assessing PHA
performance and more certain treatment of the most troubled PHAs.
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN ITALIC
               -     -      -
DESCRIPTION OF ADMINISTRATION CONCERNS
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
               -     -
        As I am sure you are aware from my testimony last year and
from other discussions in recent months, however, the

Administration has a number of major concerns about particular
provisions of both bills.  Despite its support for the general
goals of both bills, the Administration believes that certain
provisions go farther than is necessary to make the reforms that
are needed.  Instead of making only reforms, some provisions --
particularly on income targeting -- would move the program too
far away from fundamental, prudent national' standards and
appropriate federal oversight. Nevertheless, the Administration
is hopeful that our concerns can and will be addressed in the
Conference, clearing the way to enactment of sound public housing
and Section 8 reform legislation.
        The Administration's most important concerns about the bills
are described below.



I.      MAJOR CONCERNS
        A.        INADEQUATE TARGETING OF HOUSING ASSISTANCE TO THOSE
FAMILIES MOST IN NEED
                           1.      .Income Targeting in Public Housing
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN ITALIC
        The Administration believes that the income targeting
provisions of both bills must be tightened to direct more housing
assistance to families with the most pressing housing needs.      In
particular, the Administration strongly opposes the House
"fungibility" provision, which could mean that PHAs in some
cities would not have to offer any public housing units to
extremely low
o
-income families.  The Administration supports the
Senate requirement that 40% of available public housing units go
to extremely low
o
-income families; however, the Administration


also advocates increasing -- from 70% (as in the Senate bill) to
90% -- the ratio of newly available units that must be offered to
families with income levels no higher than 60% of median (which
is approximately $22,600 nationally).  The Administration also
seeks a requirement that at least 40% of the units in each public
housing development be occupied by families with incomes below
30% of area median income.  This will ensure that the poorest
families have housing opportunities at all developments,
including those that may be most marketable to relatively higher
income families.
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
        The Administration believes that the income targeting
provisions of both bills -- especially the House's "fungibility"
provision -- go much farther than is necessary to serve working

families and achieve a more diverse income mix in public housing.
It is essential to the social and financial health of public
housing communities that more working families are admitted to
public housing.  Today, the median family income in public
housing is only $6,940 per year -- just 21% of median income
nationally. By contrast, both bills would open up too many
public housing units to families at the upper end of the
eligibility range -- families with incomes of up to 80% of the
area median income, or approximately $40,000 in the ten largest
metropolitan areas.
        The Administration does not oppose admitting a small number
of families at that income level. However, the Administration
believes that mixed
o
 -income communities that serve working
families can be attained without going as far as the House and
Senate bills.   This can be done by ensuring that at least 40% of
admissions are reserved for families with incomes up to 30% of
median (approximately $11,300) and that 90% of admissions are
families with incomes at or below 60% of the area median
.(approximately $22,600).  In comparison, 60% of median income is
the absolute upper cap for the HOME and low
o
-income housing tax
credit programs.  In addition, the Administration urges the
Conferees to adopt language that would require PHAs to maintain
occupancy of at least a certain percentage of units in each
public housing development by extremely low
o
-income families.
        Not only are the income targeting percentages inadequate,
but the House bill's fungibility provision could undermine even
that level of targeting which the bill proposes.  This provision
would allow a PHA to admit even fewer very poor families to
public housing if the PHA gave more of its Section 8 certificates
to such families than the minimal number which the bill requires.
The result almost certainly would be that some PHAs would not
have to offer any public housing units to families -- including
many working families -- whose incomes are below 30% of the area
median income. The Administration finds such a possibility to be
unacceptable.
        The Administration proposed its income targeting for public
housing with the understanding that the achievement of a more
diverse income mix necessarily would result in reduced access for
those with the lowest incomes.  Partly in recognition of this
problem, the Administration each year has proposed that Congress
provide substantial additional vouchers. Congress should
recognize that these proposals are linked and that the loosening


of public housing income targeting needs to be done in
conjunction with the provision of additional vouchers.
        With respect to income targeting by development, that
concept already is part of current law.  The Administration

proposal is a moderate proposal to ensure continuing access to
all developments by all eligible income groups.
                         2.     Income Targeting in the Tenant
o
-Based Section
8 Rental Assistance Program
        The Administration is opposed to the provisions of both
bills on income targeting for the tenant
o
-based Section 8 program.
Instead, the Administration believes that 75% of tenant
o
-based
assistance which becomes available each year should be targeted
to the very poor -- families with inc.omes at or below 30% of
median income (approximately $11,300) -- and that the remainder
of suc~ assistance generally should go to families with incomes
no greater than 50% of median, as under current law.
        Both bills unnecessarily reduce the portion of Section 8
tenant
o
-based assistance that would go to families with severe
housing needs. Current law generally limits eligibility for
tenant
o
-based assistance to very low
o
-income families with incomes
below 50% of the area median income. Moreover, federal
preferences, which applied to 90% of new Section 8 recipients
prior to FY 1996 as opposed to only 50% of new public housing
residents, have served to further target assistance to extremely
low income families.  The median income of Section 8 certificate
holders is now approximately $7,550.
        In contrast, H.R. 2 would require only that 40% of all
Section 8 tenant
o
-based assistance go to extremely low
o
-income
families -- the income range which the program has primarily
served in the past.  Relatively higher income families, with
incomes up to 80% of median income, would become eligible to
receive such assistance.  S. 462 is not as extreme as the House
bill, but would still require only that 65% of all tenant
o
-based
assistance go to families with the most severe housing needs and
that 90% go to families with incomes under 60% of median.
        The Administration contends that scarce federal rental
subsidies for use in the private market must be targeted to
families with the lowest incomes, for the following reasons: 1)
5.3 million very low
o
-income renters now have "worst
o
-case housing
needs", defined as paying more than 50% of their income toward


rent or living in substandard housing units, and these families
are concentrated at the lowest income levels (below 30% of the
area median income); 2) relatively few of the families with
incomes in the upper ranges allowed under both bills who would
become eligible for admission to the Section 8 program (including
17.5 million unassisted renters) have serious unmet housing
needs; 3) federal preferences are being repealed; 4) both the
Senate and House bills propose opening up public housing
admissions to families with relatively higher incomes to promote

mixed
o
-income communities, which means fewer units will be
available for extremely poor families; and 5) tenant
o
-based rental
assistance integrates families with low incomes into private,
mixed
[l
-income housing of their choice and does not suffer from the
severe income concentration problems of project
o
-based programs.
        The Administration also sees no reason to expand tenant-
based program eligibility limits so that these scarce housing
resources can be provided to households with incomes at 80% of
the median -- approximately $40,000 for families in the ten
largest metropolitan areas -- who are better able to afford
private market housing without any subsidy. This income level,
which is equivalent to 250% of the poverty line, exceeds the
income limits for virtually all other federal means
o
-tested
programs.
        B.        HOME RULE FLEXIBLE GRANT OPTION
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN- ITALIC
        The Administration strongly opposes the Home Rule Flexible
Grant Option in H.R. 2, which could trans'fer public housing funds
from a PHA to a city government regardless of the city's ability
or experience in administering housing programs.   Instead, the
Administration believes that implementation of the current
Moving
o
-to
o
-Work demonstration will provide sufficient opportunity
to explore innovative local approaches in the public housing and
Section 8 programs.
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
        The Administration strongly opposes the Home Rule Flexible
Grant Option in H.R. 2.     This provision could completely
undermine the public housing program in some localities by
allowing the city government to supplant the local PHA and
capture its funds, with limited explanation and no justification.
        The Administration has taken bold action to deal with
chronically troubled PHAs and to demolish and replace the worst
public housing.    However, that is not what the House provision is
about. The House provision would allow a city government,
regardless of its motives or its track record in administering
housing programs, to take over or replace even a high
o
-performing
housing authority.     Some of the most intractable management


problems in recent years have occurred in several chronically
troubled PHAs that have been operated as part of city government.
        The provision also inexplicably provides cities that would
administer public housing more regulatory flexibility than PHAs
(e.g., to charge rents exceeding Brooke amendment requirements).
There is no reason to link additional regulatory flexibility with
the choice of the entity to administer public housing.


         If the goal of this provision is to address serious
management problems in public housing, one would expect it to be
crafted as an alternative intervention strategy with respect to
troubled PHAs.   The provision instead would be applicable to all
PHAS irrespective of the demonstrated quality of their
management.
        Instead, the Administration supports continued
implementation of the Moving to work demonstration authorized by
the FY 1996 appropriations act. That demonstration program
allows up to thirty PHAs to design and test innovative ways to
provide housing. assistance and to link families to work, through
merging funding streams and testing new rent structures while
retaining reasonable income targeting.   HUD has selected PHAs
with diverse and potentially far
o
-reaching proposals.  The
demonstration is large enough to allow substantial
experimentation, yet small enough to permit a rigorous evaluation
of program success and replicability.
        C.      COMMUNITY WORK AND SELF
o
-SUFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
         The Administration opposes the self
o
-sufficiency agreements
and the community work provisions in the House bill.  Instead,
the Administration believes that provisions emphasizing
collaboration between PHAs and local welfare agencies are a
better and more productive approach to addressing welfare reform
and self
o
-sufficiency issues.  For example, the Administration
supports the provisions in both bills which require PHAs to
describe in their annual plans the ways in which they propose
coordination with other local and state welfare and service
agencies, and assure that households who violate welfare program
self
o
-sufficiency rules are not rewarded with subsidized housing
rent decreases.  The Administration also supports provisions in
both bills permitting PHAs to set public housing rents "up to"
30% of a family'S adjusted income, which allows for rent
structures that do not penalize increases in earned income.
Further, the Administration supports authorization of additional
Section 8 certificates for use with local collaboratives in
welfare
o
-to
o
-work initiatives.
        The Administration believes that public housing and Section
8 residents must assume certain responsibilities in return for
the benefits of their housing assistance.  To this end, the
Administration supports many reforms in both the House and Senate


bills which place a premium on resident self
o
-sufficiency and on
linking the PHA with existing providers of services.
Additionally, the Administration supports provisions in both
bills to toughen screening, lease enforcement, and eviction, and
subsidy termination requirements.


        However, the Administration opposes the House bill's
mandatory self
II
-sufficiency contracts.  This sweeping new
requirement would fundamentally change the public housing and
Section 8 programs and would impose inordinate and costly burdens
on 3,400 local PHAs whose budgets and administrative capacities
already have been stretched.  A far more efficient and effective
approach is to encourage partnerships between PHAs and State and
local welfare agencies that promote self
o
-sufficiency through
initiatives such as the authorization of "Welfare to Work"
certificates, as proposed in the Administration's bill.
        The Administration also opposes significant aspects of the
community work provisions included in the House bill.   The
Administration's bill includes a community service provision
because the Administration believes it is reasonable to ask each
recipient of public housing or tenant
o
-based assistance to be
engaged in some activity which benefits the community as a whole,
which includes working, attending school, or otherwise preparing
for work.  However, the Administration's bill provides for much
more reasonable exemptions than the House bill and would not
authorize eviction as an enforcement tool.

        D.       MANAGEMENT REFORM

                        1.       Federal Oversight
        The Administration supports several of the bills' revisions
to the PHMAP system and would support the establishment of a
performance evaluation board or other task force to review
various performance evaluation systems and determine the need, if
any, for an outside accreditation entity. The Administration
also supports the House and Senate bill provisions which give HUD
or a receiver enhanced powers for dealing with troubled PHAs;
require the takeover,of severely troubled PHAs that fail to
improve promptly; and require the obligation and expenditure of
capital funds within certain time frames (which the
Administration believes should be extended to the HOPE VI
program). The Administration does not support the Accreditation
Board created by the House bill.
        The Administration believes that it is critical to have an
assessment tool which accurately measures PHA performance and is
consistent with the Administration's management reform plan for
HUD.  In the short run, this requires making modifications to the
current performance measurement system -- the Public Housing
Management Assessment Program (PHMAP).   In particular, the
Administration supports the bills' provision adding a PHMAP
indicator assessing the extent to which a PHA is providing
acceptable basic housing conditions and the House provision

making acceptable basic housing conditions a precondition for a


PHA to get a passing grade in the assessment system. This will
support HUD's efforts to make PHMAP more objectively verifiable
and reflective of the conditions under which public housing
residents are living.
        The Administration, however, strongly opposes the House
bill's "Accreditation Board", a new federal agency which would
create an accreditation program for all public housing agencies
and other providers of federally assisted housing.  This
proposal, written prior to the Administration's management reform
efforts, runs directly counter to the Administration's plan for
improving and streamlining Federal oversight of the public
housing program. It would not reduce, but instead would
redistribute and probably increase, the Federal bureaucracy.
Moreover, the proposal would appear to divorce Federal oversight
and auditing responsibilities which would be given to the
Accreditation Board, from HUD's ongoing obligation to provide
Federal funds to PHAs. This would make it more difficult for HUD
to hold PHAs accountable.
        Instead of the House bill's Accreditation Board, an entity
such as the Administration'S proposed Performance Evaluation
Board should be given the opportunity to review and make
recommendations on various approaches to Federal oversight and
assessment of PHAs, including accreditation.  Finally, the
Justice Department advises that the proposed means of appointing
the Accreditation Board would unduly restrict the President and
thus violate the Appointments Clause of the Constitution.
        The Administration already has taken the most aggressive
actions in HUD's history against chronically troubled PHAs,
including direct takeovers and support for judicial
receiverships.  In this regard, the Administration supports the
Senate bill's provisions giving HUD enhanced powers to deal with
troubled PHAs (which are the same provisions as in the
Administration's bill). Those provisions require HUD to take
certain actions against any PHA that is still troubled after one
year (including mandatory receivership for any large PHA). After
further consideration, the Administration believes that this
provision should be modified to give a troubled PHA one
additional year before HUD will take action if that PHA has made
progress in the first year that is equal to at least half the
difference between its PHMAP score and the score necessary to be
a "standard" performer.
        In addition, the Administration supports the Senate bill
provision requiring PHAs to obligate capital funds within 24
months.  It is critical in these times of fiscal restraint to
ensure that appropriated funds are used promptly for their
intended purposes.  Further, the Administration urges the

Conferees to adopt two additional provisions from the
Administration's bill: (1) requiring PHAs to spend capital funds
within 48 months (in addition to obligating such funds within 24
months); and (2) applying specific time frames to the HOPE VI
program, such that a PHA would have to sign a primary
construction contract within 18 months of executing the grant
agreement, and would have to complete construction within 4 years
from the grant agreement.
                         2.      Consolidation and Streamlining
         The Administration urges the Conferees to further streamline
PHA plan requirements as in the Administration's bill.   In
addition, the Administration supports the House provision
allowing small PHAs to use operating and capital funds
interchangeably.   The Administration also advocates the deletion
of provisions constraining flexibility in the operating subsidy
formula.   Further, the Administration urges the Conferees to


convert the Drug Elimination Program into a formula
o
-based
program, and to merge the TOP and EDSS programs.
         The Administration supports and recognizes the benefits of
consolidating PHA planning and reporting requirements into a
single annual plan, as provided in both the Senate and House
bills. However, the Administration is concerned that the scope
of the annual plans be consistent with HUD efforts to streamline
PHA and HUD administration of the public housing and Section 8
programs. The Administration strongly urges the Conferees to
consider limiting the number and scope of plan elements as
described in the Administration'S bill.   Conferees also should
adopt the Senate provision permitting HUD by regulation to
provide that elements of the PHA plan other than the capital plan
and civil rights shall be reviewed only if challenged.
        The Administration also supports the House provision
allowing small PHAs (less than 250 units) to use operating and
capital funds fungibly, as provided in the House bill, because
the formula allocation of capital funds to such PHAs would be
small and the additional flexibility would simplify PHA
operations and HUD administration. However, the Administration
opposes the provision of the House bill giving governors new
responsibility to allocate half of such funds.
        In addition, the Administration supports the language in
both bills authorizing HUD to renegotiate the formula for
allocating public housing operating subsidies to PHAs. The
current system has not been changed in many years.   A
renegotiation could result in a revised formula that is simpler
and more equitable, and that provides better incentives for
sound, cost
o
-effective public housing management.     However, HUD

opposes the House provisions defining treatment of vacant units,
utility rates, and .rental income. These provisions may hamstring
and substantially complicate the future formula and should be
left to rulemaking (which will be negotiated rulemaking under the
House and Senate bills).   The extent to which PHAs may retain
increases in rental income, in particular, should be left to
rulemaking because:   (1) rental income is increasing
substantially throughout the program, for reasons that may be
unrelated to PHA administration of the program; and (2) such
retention creates a strong financial incentive for PHAs not to
serve the poorest households.   The House ?204(d) interim
allocation provisions also are unnecessary.
        In addition Further, the Administration urges the Conferees
to convert the Public Housing Drug Elimination Program from a
competitive to a formula
o
-based program, to provide predictable
funding for PHAs and reduce the administrative burden on both HUD
and PHAs of annual competitions. The Administration also
advocates permanent authorization of the supportive service
(EDSS) program and a merger of EDSS and the Tenant Opportunities
Program (TOP), as provided in the Administration's bill.

        E.      OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
        The Administration opposes the House bill's provision on
occupancy standards because it would reduce protections currently
afforded to families with children under the Fair Housing Act.
        The House provision on occupancy standards would invite
state adoption of absolute occupancy standards regardless of the


facts of a particular situation, or the existence of any health
or safety justifications.  Enactment of this provision could
result, for example, in a State allowing a housing provider to
refuse to rent a 2
o
-bedroom unit to a family with three children,
even if: 1) the bedrooms were unusually large; 2) one of the
children was an infant; or 3) a den could reasonably be used as a
bedroom. This could contribute to the shortage of affordable
housing large enough for families. HUD's current occupancy
standard, which conforms to Congress's direction in the FY 1996
HUD Appropriation Act, appropriately requires HUD to determine,
on a case by case basis, whether a standard is legal under the
Fair Housing Act, based upon a variety of circumstances.
        F.      RESIDENT EMPOWERMENT
        The Administration strongly supports provisions in both
bills, and retention of certain elements of current law, which
empower residents, ensure that residents are given the
opportunity to participate in decisions affecting their lives,
and protect residents from unwarranted intrusions.


         In the Administration's view, the final bill must include,
at least, the following:
         ?        The Senate bill's authorization of the supportive
                  services funding originally authorized in the FY
1996
                  appropriation (the EDSS program), which should
include
                  elements of the Tenant Opportunity Program as proposed
in the Administration's                                                            bill;
         ?        Resident membership requirements on the public housing
                  board, as provided in both bills, and the House bill's
required plan review period for affected residents;
         ?        The Senate bill's provisions protecting residents'
rights to                                                          adequate notice
and consultation and ensuring adequate relocation
assistance in the demolition and disposition process;
and
         ?        Retention of current law provisions on: (1) lease and
grievance procedures (as opposed to the House repeal) ;
and (2) notice of lease termination (as opposed to the
House bill's preemption of any minimum notice
requirements provided under State law) .
        G.        ACCESS TO MEDICAL RECORDS
        The Administration strongly opposes the provision in the
Senate bill that would authorize PHAs to obtain medical
information about applicants for housing assistance.
        This provision could increase the potential that important
antidiscrimination protections of Federal fair housing laws could
be violated and could discourage persons with drug problems from
seeking treatment.    The Administration shares the Senate's desire
to ensure safety and security in public housing, and has proposed
and implemet:lted tough new policies, such as "One Strike and
You?re Out", to achieve that goa~.    However, the Administration
believes that the Senate's medical records provision goes too
far,weakening other important legal protections and compromising
efforts to encourage people with drug abuse problems to enter
appropriate and effective treatment programs.    The Administration
is concerned that this provision could have negative consequences
for individuals who have received treatment and are attempting to
rebuild their lives.
        H.        PAYMENT STANDARD



        The Administration opposes the provisions of both bills

allowing PHAs to set the payment standard in the tenant
o
-based
Section 8· program at levels higher than the Fair Market Rent
established by HUD.
        The Administration believes that the Payment Standard should
be set at no higher than the Fair Market Rent (FMR) or a
HUD
o
-approved exception rent up to 120% of FMR.   H.R. 2 would
permit PHAs to establish payment standards of 80% to 120% of FMR.
The Senate bill would allow PHAs to establish payment standards
of 90% to 110% of FMR, though PHAs may establish higher or lower
payment standards with HUD approval.
        The higher the payment standard, the greater the subsidy to
each assisted household. Consequently, fewer eligible families
would receive housing assistance.   The pressures on PHAs to help
the currently assisted at the expense of the unassisted are very
high, and work against national goals of helping more families in
need.  In addition, a higher payment standard would encourage a
greater number of relatively higher
o
-income and less needy
families to apply for housing assistance, further reducing the
amount of housing assistance available to the poorest families
with the most severe housing needs.
II .    OTHER CONCERNS
        A.  REPEAL OF THE U.S. HOUSING ACT OF 1937
        The Administ·ration urges Congress to find another means of
signaling dramatic program reform.
        The Administration sees no compelling operational reason to
repeal the 1937 Act.   Congress and the Administration can find
another, less divisive, way to ensure that the legislation
clearly indicates the intent that public housing change
dramatically. The new law can be crafted so that it clearly calls
for sweeping reform of the public housing and tenant
o
-based
assistance programs, without including the complications of
repealing the 1937 Act.
        There are also practical concerns regarding repeal. At the
request of the House Banking Committee in the previous
legislative session, the Administration conducted an extensive
review of the implications of the proposed repeal of the U.S.
Housing Act of 1937.  HUD determined that there are, at a
minimum, over 500 references to the 1937 Act in other statutes,
located both within and outside of the jurisdiction of the
Congressional Banking Committees. Additionally, the
Administration identified a series of issues which the Conferees
should address if the repeal is accepted in the Conference.
Moreover, coupling the 1937 Act repeal with a ban on new

regulations prior to the effective date of the law, as provided
in the House bill, would inhibit the ability of the
Administration to ensure that the new law is carried out
uniformly and with adequate guidance.
        B. RENT LEVELS
        1. Flat Rents
        The Administration does not see the need for the House bill
provision giving public housing residents the choice of paying an


income
o
-based rent or a flat rent based on the market value of
their units.
         This provision would be administratively burdensome to the
In addition to the administrative burden on 3,400 PHAs who will
have of having to determine the market value of well over one
million public housing units, including units in elderly housing
developments. the result of the House bill's flat rent proposal
 ("Family Choice of Rental Payment") would be to give residents
the opportunity to make a bad economic choice.   That is,
residents could choose to pay a rent based on the flat rent even
when thirty percent of their adjusted income would be lower.    If
In addition; if the goal is to encourage residents to i~crease
their incomes or to encourage relatively higher
o
-income families
to move into or remain in public housing, then the same thing can
be accomplished by implementing a program of rent incentives,
including earned income disregards and ceiling rents.   Both bills
allow PHAs to adopt innovative rent policies by permitting rents
"up to" 30% of adjusted income (as opposed to current law, which
requires rents to be set "at" 30% of adjusted income) .
                 2. Minimum Rents
        The Administration opposes the minimum rent provisions in
the bills, particularly the authority in the House bill to set a
minimum up to fifty dollars. Instead, the Administration supports
a minimum rent requirement of $25 per month, with an exemption
for hardship categories to be determined by the Secretary or the
PHA.
        The Administration generally agrees with the concept that
every family receiving housing assistance should make at least
some rental payment.  However, the Administration believes such a
minimum rent should not exceed $25 per month, an amount which is
sufficient to make the symbolic point that all residents should
contribute something to maintenance of their development without
imposing an undue burden on the very poorest families. Thus, the
Administration opposes the House provision allowing PHAs to
charge a minimum rent of up to $50 per month.  Further, the

Administration believes that the Secretary of HUD must have the
authority to establish hardship exemptions for certain types of
cases -- for example, for those families awaiting public benefit
eligibility determinations.

        C. HOME AND CDBG INCOME TARGETING
        The Administration opposes the House bill's unnecessarily
loosened income targeting in both the CDBG and HOME programs.
        This proposal would immediately raise the income limit in
thirty
o
-seven relatively higher income metropolitan areas.  For
example, in one community, the income limit for a four person
family would exceed $71,000 (Stamford, Connecticut).  By allowing
families with incomes even above moderate income ranges to
benefit from these programs, these changes would eviscerate the
requirement that those programs substantially benefit low and
moderate income households.
        D. DISCRETION TO SETTLE LAWSUITS
        The Administration opposes the House bill's provision which
requires the Secretary of HUD to consult all adjacent local
governments, when settling any lawsuit involving HUD, a PHA, and
a local government.


        This provision is an unnecessary intrusion into the federal
government?s ability to manage its affairs. Moreover, the
Justice Department represents HUD in settling lawsuits. It would
be unwise to require the Secretary of HUD to engage in particular
consultations that may conflict with or duplicate the efforts of
the Justice Department. At a minimum, this provision could be
extremely costly for the Federal government, since it will hinder
the ability to settle lawsuits in a timely and cost
o
-effective
manner.  Finally, the provision is overly broad, since it would
require such consultation for all matters, whether trivial or
substantial.
        E. CDBG SANCTION
        The Administration opposes the House bill's CDBG sanction
against local governments contributing to the troubled status of
a PHA.
        H.R. 2 provides that the Secretary may withhold or redirect
the CDBG funds of any local government whose actions or inactions
have substantially contributed to the troubled status of a PHA.
The proposed CDBG sanction could lead to substantial charges,
countercharges, and litigation, without resulting in the

improvement of troubled PHAs.   Current law, coupled with new
sanctions included in both The bill~ gives HUD a number of other
sanctions to deal with troubled PHAs, including receivership.
The proposed CDBG sanction could lead to substantial charges,
countercharges, and litigation, without resulting in the
improvement of troubled PHAs.
        F. AVAILABILITY OF CRIMINAL CONVICTION RECORDS
        The Administration opposes the apparent requirement in the
House bill that private owners of federally assisted housing be
provided with information regarding criminal conviction records
of adult applicants or tenants of that housing.
        The Administration opposes allowing any private citizens or
entities, including the private owners of federally assisted
housing, to obtain criminal record information about other
individuals.  The provision of such sensitive information to
private individuals and entities raises significant privacy
concerns. The Administration will work with Congress to identify
other means of bolstering security efforts in privately owned,
federally assisted housing.
G. DESIGNATED HOUSING
        The Administration opposes the changes H.R. 2 makes to
current law requirements for designation of housing for elderly
persons or persons' with disabilities. These changes would weaken
current law provisions requiring PHAs to consider the housing
needs of persons with disabilities, and would not allow an
adequate time period for proper review of designated housing
plans.
        Under current law, a PHA's plan to designate housing must
meet two requirements.   First, the plan must be "necessary to
meet the jurisdiction's Comprehensive Housing Affordability
Strategy, "and" the plan must be "necessary to meet the
low
o
-income housing needs of the jurisdiction." Under H.R. 2, a
PHA would need to meet only one of these two prongs, showing that
a designation plan is necessary to meet either the CHAS "or" the
low income housing needs of the jurisdiction.
        These changes are not necessary and are likely to have a
detrimental impact on access to housing for persons with
disabilities.  The current statutory framework is working


effectively. HUD has been successful in helping PHAs designate
thousands of units for elderly persons, while preserving housing
access for persons with disabilities in those communities.
        Allowing a PHA to rely solely on a CHAS, as H.R. 2 proposes,
may lead to designations which are inconsistent with the housing

needs of persons served by the PHA. The CHAS is written based
upon Consolidated Plan regulations that are tailored to community
planning and development programs and that do not require
communities to assess the housing needs of persons with
disabilities in general. Rather, they refer specifically only to
persons with disabilities who require service
o
-connected or
accessible housing.  The vast majority of persons with
disabilities who apply to live in public housing are merely
low
o
-income individuals who also have disabilities. Theyare
neither looking for, nor need supportive housing. Moreover, the
proposed change would effectively create different statutory
requirements for large and small PHAs, since Consolidated Plans
are only required for jurisdictions with populations of more than
50,000.
         In addition, the submission and review of designated housing
plans should not be incorporated into the PHA's "local housing
management plan", as under the House bill.   The Administration
believes that, since they involve significant decisions that
could permanently limit access to important housing resources for
some low
o
-income people, designated housing plans should be
considered separately from the many other administrative and
management issues that are addressed in the local housing
management plan.
H. TOTAL DEVELOPMENT COSTS
        The Administration urges the Conferees to include language
reflecting the Administration's proposal on total development
costs.
        The Conference staffs have been provided with HUD's proposal
on total development costs.   The proposal would assure that
capital costs allowed for HOPE VI and other public housing
development will produce sound and durable, but modest, housing
that fits into the community.   It would also assure that the
costs of community development and supportive service activities
are not confused with the costs of housing construction.   HUD
urges the Conferees to include statutory language that reflects
this proposal.
        I.       VOLUNTEER SERVICES

PRINTER FONT 12 POINT_ROMAN_ITALIC
        The Administration urges the Conferees to take this
opportunity to revise the volunteer exception to the Davis
o
-Bacon
Act to conform to the language of the Community Improvement
Volunteer Act of 1994.
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
        There is no policy reason to continue the differences in the
definitions of volunteer exemptions.  The Administration included
the necessary language in its public housing bill (H.R. 1447,
Section 121). Any volunteer provisions regarding resident



management corporations also need to be consistent with this
definition.
        J.       SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS·
         [Awaiting DOJ rewrite.]

        I look forward to contributing to the constructive
resolution of these issues. As always, please call upon me and
the HUD staff for any assistance we can provide.

                                                     Sincerely,

                                                     Andrew Cuomo
==================   END ATTACHMENT    1   ==================




