    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL             (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:12-APR-1999 17:15:27.00

    SUBJECT:      Draft -- H.R. 800 -- ED Flex Letter to the conferees -- Final Clearance

    TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP                          [ WHO I   )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    fyi
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 04/12/99 05:18
    PM ---------------------------




    Sandra Yamin
    04/12/99 04:44:54 PM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
    cc:      Mindy E. Myers/WHO/EOP, Dario J. Gomez/WHO/EOP, Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
    Subject:         Draft -- H.R. 800 -- ED Flex Letter to the conferees -- Final
    Clearance

    Attached for your clearance is the draft letter from Sec Riley directed to
    the conferees on H.R. 800 ED Flex Partnership Act of 1999.  In the draft,
    Sec Riley states, "The Senate bill, however, contains unacceptable
    provisions regarding the class size reduction authority that are unrelated
    to the expansion of ED-Flex authority and, if adopted, would force me to
    recommend to the President that he veto the bill." The conference report
    is scheduled for House consideration on Friday, April 16th.   We would
    like to get this letter out today.  Please respond to me with your
    comments and/or sign-off as soon as possible.  My apologies for the short
    turnaround.  Thank you.




    Message Sent
    To:
    Law-r-e-n-c-e--J=-.~S-t-e~i~n-/7W~H~O~/~E~O~P=--------------------------------------------

    Charles M. Brain/WHO/EOP
    Broderick Johnson/WHO/EOP
    Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
    Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
    William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP
    Bethany Little/OPD/EOP
    Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP
    Janet Murguia/WHO/EOP
    Jonathan H. Schnur/OPD/EOP
    Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP




          Dear Conferee:

          I am writing to express my views on the House-and Senate-passed versions of H.R. 800, the
          Education Flexibility Partnership Act of 1999. As you know, "ED-Flex" authority permits States
          to waive certain statutory and regulatory requirements that apply to Federal education programs
          in a manner that complements State educational reform efforts and promotes achievement to high
          standards by all students. The Administration has long supported the concept of expanding
          ED-Flex authority beyond the 12 States allowed under current law, so long as that expansion
          does not undermine the purposes of those Federal programs and maintains a high degree of
          accountability for results. I am very pleased, therefore, that both bills would expand eligibility for
          ED-Flex status to all the States, as well as the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of
          Puerto Rico, and couple that increased flexibility with a serious attention to maintaining
          accountability at the State and local level. The Senate bill, however, contains unacceptable
          provisions regarding the class size reduction authority that are unrelated to the expansion of ED-
          Flex authority and, if enacted adopted, would force me to recommend to the President that he
          veto the bill. I urge the Conferees to avoid such a disappointing and unnecessary result.

          Turning to the ED-Flex provisions, I am very pleased that both bills have strong provisions for
          ensuring State monitoring of local ED- Flex activities and termination of waivers that have
          inadequate or harmful results. With regard to the following provisions, I offer the following
          views:

                 Public notice and comment. I am pleased that both the Senate and House versions contain
                 provisions to enhance parental involvement in the ED-Flex waiver process. In order to
                 maximize parental involvement and improve ED-Flex waivers, I support the Senate's
                 provision on this issue, with the addition of language included in the House bill requiring
                 the public notice to contain a description of any expected improvements in student
                 performance and the public comments received by the State and local education agencies
                 to be made available for public review.

                 Expansion of ED-Flex Authority. With regard to the expansion of the ED-Flex authority,
                 I support the Senate version of the bill, which would make very clear that a State may not
                 waive Federal requirements applicable to the State as a ..",hole itself.

                 Accountability Provisions. With respect to State eligibility for ED-Flex status, I support
                 the more rigorous conditions in the HOllse bill, as they apply to implementation of
                 standards and assessments under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
                 of 1965 (ESEA). With respect to the State's application for ED-Flex status, I support the
                 language in the Senate bill, which focuses on how ED-Flex authority will assist in
                 implementing the State's comprehensive reform plan. Regarding the renewal of Ed-Flex
                 authority, I support the more rigorous requirements in the House version that require the
                 State to show measurable progress toward achieving the State's educational objectives.




                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion




               Targeting Provisions. With respect to waivers that would not be authorized, I strongly
               support both the House and Senate versions regarding school eligibility for Title I Part A
               since both these provision provisions target funds more directly eH to high poverty
               schools.

               State Reporting. I believe that complete State reporting of ED-Flex results is important
               and so support the provisions of the House bill relating to annual State reporting to .the
               Secretary about the numbers and characteristics of waivers granted.

               Sunset Provision. Finally, I strongly support the provision of the House bill that would
               "sunset" this Act upon enactment of the upcoming reauthorization of the ESEA, because
               it is vitally important that continuation of ED-Flex authority be made consistent with
               changes to the underlying Federal programs to which it applies.

        Class Size

        Last fall, Congress enacted and funded, on a bipartisan basis, a down payment on the President's
        plan to help the Nation's school districts reduce class sizes in the early elementary grades.
        Regrettably, the Senate bill contains amendments to the class size reduction authority that would
        undermine its impact by permitting local school districts to use funds received under that initiative
        not to reduce class size, but to meet obligations they are already required to meet under Part B of
        the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. The value of reducing class size in the early
        elementary grades is supported by tfle research, and doing so is one of the most important things
        we can do to honor our national commitment to ensuring equal educational opportunity for all
        our children. Moreover, reducing class size in the early grades allows teachers to identify, and
        work more effectively with, students who have learning disabilities, thereby potentially reducing
        those students' need for intensive special education services in the later grades. Rather than
        undermining the bipartisan effort to reduce class size--and setting parent against parent in school
        districts across the country--I would have supported a bill that extended the President's initiative,
        so that school districts could plan to hire additional qualified teachers, provide additional
        classrooms, and take the other steps necessary to reduce class size. I certainly cannot support a
        bill that contains these Senate amendments and would recommend that the President veto it, if it
        were presented to him.

        The Office of Management and Budget advises that there is no objection to the submission of
        this report and that from the standpoint of the Administration's program, enactment of H.R. 800
        containing the Senate's amendments relating to the class size reduction initiative would not be in
        accord with the President's program.


                                                              Yours sincerely,




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
