 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 20-MAY-1999 14': 54: 33.00

 SUBJECT:   FYI -- Bill Galston asked me to share this with you as an FYI

 TO: Ron Klaln ( CN=Ron Klain/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I'm the biggest fan of RFRA (now RLPA) in this building, but you should
 not take this advice right now.   You'll have a gay/lesbian firestorm on
 your hands.   (Alternatively, if you come out for a version of RFRA that
 has a civil rights carve-out, you'll have a religious groups firestorm on
 your hands.) We had a meeting with the religious groups yesterday and are
 having a meeting with the gay groups Monday to see whether we can work out
 some kind of rapprochment (sp?).   We'll let 'you know as soon as it's safe
 to go back in the water.
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on OS/20/99 02:53
 PM ---------------------------




   Eli G. Attie @ OVP
   OS/20/99 01:28:51 PM
'. Record Type:    Record

 To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
 cc:
 Subject:         FYI -- Bill Galston asked me to share this with you as an
 FYI


 ---------------------- Forwarded by Eli G. Attie/OVP on OS/20/99 01:27 PM




         Bill Galston <wg14@umail.umd.edu>
         OS/20/99 11:14:55 AM
 Please respond to Bill Galston <wg14@umail.umd.edu>
 Record Type: Record

 To: Eli G. Attie/OVP
 cc:
 Subject: Religious Freedom Restoration Act




  - Rfra.wpd



 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

MEMORANDUM FOR THE VICE PRESIDENT

FROM:      BILL GALSTON

VIA:       ELAINE KAMARCK

SUBJ:      RELIGIOUS FREEDOM RESTORATION ACT


        During the speech preparation on Monday, you indicated a strong interest in the Religious
Freedom Restoration Act. The purpose ofthis memorandum is to provide some background on
this legislation, update you on its current status, and offer a proposed position and speech
language for your consideration.

Background

        From 1963 through 1990, legislation and jurisprudence concerning the free exercise of
religion was guided by the Supreme Court's decision in Sherbert v. Verner. In that decision, the
Court said that any law "substantially burdening" religious liberty could only be justified if it
promoted a "compelling state interest." This test had the effect offorcing government to
discharge a heavy burden of proof before it would be allowed to proceed with legislation that
interfered with religious free exercise to any significant degree. Most faith cornmunities were
satisfied with this interpretation of the Free Exercise Clause.

       In 1990, the status quo was disrupted by the Court's decision in Employment Division v.
Smith. In a bitterly contested 5-4 decision with the majority's opinion by Justice Scalia, the
Court set aside the compelling state interest test and said in effect that neutral laws of general
applicability promoting legitimate state purposes would be presumed constitutional even when
not supported by a compelling governmental interest, and even if their effect was to interfere
with the religious practices of some individuals or religious groups

        This decision sparked widespread outrage in faith communities. Starting in 1991,
Congress convened hearings, and a broad coalition came together around the Religious Freedom
Restoration Act (RFRA), which was enacted into law in 1993 with the strong support of the
Clinton-Gore administration. The stated purpose ofRFRA was to restore the compelling state
interest test as set forth in Sherbert v. Verner and to offer opportunities for legal claims and
defenses to individuals whose religious exercise is substantially burdened by government. The
law prohibited governme!1t from substantially burdening religious exercise unless it can be
demonstrated that the burden (1) furthers a compelling governmental interest and (2) is the least
intrusive means of furthering that interest.

       From the outset, worries were raised about the constitutionality of this law. There was no
doubt that it was intended to overturn the Smith decision and to establish through legislation an



                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
r




            alternative understanding of the Constitution. This could be regarded as a violation of separation
            of power--that is, as a congressional usurpation of a quintessentially judicial function. That is
            what the Supreme Court did in City of Boerne v. Flores, handed down in 1997. The facts were
            as follows: the Catholic archbishop of San Antonio applied for a building permit to enlarge a
            church in the town of Boerne, Texas. When local authorities denied the permit, citing a local
            historic preservation ordinance, the Archbishop brought suit under RFRA. The Court held that
            RFRA was not a proper exercise of congressional authority under section 5 of the Fourteenth
            Amendment, on which Congress had relied in making RFRA binding on the states. Six justices
            concurred, though for varying reasons; three--O'Connor, Breyer, and Souter--dissented.

                    In the wake of the Boerne decision, the religious coalition regrouped and redrafted RFRA
            to neutralize the Court's constitutional objections. Rather than relying on section 5 of the
            Fourteenth Amendment, the revised bill--now called the Religious Liberty Protection Act
            (RLP A)--rests its case for enforcement powers vis-a-vis the states on the commerce and spending
            clauses.

                    After going nowhere in Congress in 1998, the RLPA has gathered momentum this year.
            Hearings were help before the House Judiciary Committee in March, and a markup is expected in
            the next few weeks. The religious coalition that supported RFRA so strongly continues to push
            for the revised bill.

                     There is a new wrinkle, however. I am told that some groups--mainly gay and lesbian
             rights organizations--have raised objections to RLP A on the grounds that it could enhance the
             ability of individuals citing religious convictions to discriminate against them and other
             minorities. For this reason, the ACLU has broken ranks and is demanding language in the bill
             specifying that religious free exercise claims cannot be used to justify discrimination. (This may
             be the reason why there are as yet no Democratic cosponsors for this bill in the House.) The pro-
             RLP A coalition, though overwhelming sympathetic to this concern, believes that allowing any
             carve-outs would open the political floodgates to a host of others--prison officials, local zoning
           . authorities, and school administrators, for starts--that would kill the bill, and they are therefore
             opposing all amendments. This is the position oftraditionally liberal, pro-civil rights religious
             groups such as Reform Jews as well as more traditionalist groups.

                   You should also be aware of the fact that a coalition of the principal organizations
           representing states, counties, and municipalities has put this bill on its list of so-called
           "preemption" legislation that the coalition opposes on the grounds that it makes life more
           difficult for state drug programs, municipal zoning ordinance, and the like.

           Recommendation

                   Despite these difficulties, I believe that you should move affirmatively in this area and
           that you can do so without becoming entangled in a controversy among friends. Specifically, you
           could say in next Monday's speech that:




                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion




             (1) The free exercise of religious faith is one of the very most importance values in our
     entire constitutional tradition and deserves that highest possible level of protection.

             (2) You disagree with the Court's Smith decision on the grounds that it needlessly and
     dangerously weakens protections for religious freedom against government intrusion. (For
     example, in the wake of Smith, courts in Michigan and Rhode Island forced the families of
     Jewish accident victims to endure government-ordered autopsies oftheir loved ones even though
     autopsies directly violate a basic tenet of Jewish law and there was no finding that the autopsies
     were necessary for compelling government purposes such as suspicion of foul play or contagious
     disease.)

             (3) While you understand the Court's constitutional objections to RFRA, you continue to
     believe that corrective legislation is necessary and proper. Our tradition of civil rights makes it
     clear that no part of our government--federal, state, or local--has the right to act in ways that deny
     individuals the enjoyment of fundamental liberties, and religious free exercise is certainly one of
     those liberties.

             (4) You support legislation, consistent with the Constitution, that requires governments to
     show that action restricting religious free exercise is necessary to further a compelling purpose
     and does so in the least burdensome way. You are convinced that this can be done in a way that
     is consistent with the full range of our cherished individual and civil liberties.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
