RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan (CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUN-1999 09:57:19.00

SUBJECT:   DC READS VOLUNTEER OPPORTUNITY

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
this is great.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 06/07/99 10:01
AM ---------------------------




Hillary Rodham Clinton
06/07/99 09:51:29 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      All EOP Users, All USTR Users
cc:
Subject:         DC READS VOLUNTEER OPPORTUNITY

During July and August, an estimated 30,000 District of Columbia students
with low test scores will participate in the D.C. Public Schools summer
program.  The program is part of the DistrictD,s ambitious plan to end
social promotion and give children the extra help they need to meet higher
education standards. This is the kind of positive reform the President
has asked all school districts nationwide to adopt.   Those of us who work
at the White House have a special responsibility -- and an exciting
opportunity -- to help the District's effort succeed.

In order to help as many students as possible improve their scores and
advance to the next grade with their classmates, the D.C. Public Schools
and the organization known as DC Reads are looking for more than a
thousand reading tutors who will work one-on-one with children.  The
President, who issued an executive memorandum last year to make it easier
for Federal employees to volunteer their time, will ask all Federal
agencies to consider adopting a D.C. school this summer.

It is my hope that White House staff, interns, and volunteers (and their
friends and family members) will meet this challenge by adopting Francis
Junior High School. The school is within walking distance of the White
House (24th and N Streets, N.W.), and it is in great need of volunteer
tutors with or without previous tutoring experience. Although the site is
a junior high school, most of the children in the summer program are
first- to sixth-graders. Many are or have been homeless.   Some are
currently living with foster families.

The time commitment for tutors is modest: a maximum of 12 hours over the
course of the summer.  Tutors are asked to attend a two-hour training and
orientation session on June 28 or 29. Then they will work with students
once a week, for five weeks, starting July 6. Tutors are needed Mondays,
from 6:15 p.m. to 8:15 p.m. or Tuesdays, from 6:15 to 8:15.  If you are
unable to attend on a given evening, the coordinators simply ask that you
give them several hours' notice.

        If you are interested in finding out more about volunteering at
Francis or any other D.C. school this summer, please click on the button
below. One of our volunteer coordinators will get in touch with you.
Thank you very much.




