   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

   CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

   CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1999 13:44:52.00

   SUBJECT:

   TO: Courtney O. Gregoire ( CN=Courtney O. Gregoire/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
   READ: UNKNOWN

   TEXT:
   June 4, 1999

   MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

   FROM:                   Bruce Reed

   SUBJECT:                        Executive Order on Racial Profiling

           You are scheduled to participate Wednesday in an hour-long
   roundtable discussion with about .30 representatives of the civil rights
   and law enforcement communities, possibly including Jesse Jackson, Kweisi
   Mfume, Al Sharpton, Wade Henderson, Hugh Price, FOP President Gil
   Gallegos, Boston Police Commissioner Paul Evans, and Baltimore Police
   commissioner Thomas Frazier. This discussion is meant to help the civil
   rights and law enforcement communities find common ground on how to deal
   with police abuse and misconduct, including racial profiling. Although
   the Attorney General, Chuck Ruff, and I have met with most of the invitees
   in preparation for this meeting, many remain skeptical about each otherD,s
   motives and about what the meeting will accomplish.   We are hopeful that
   your involvement in the roundtable will help keep the civil rights and law
   enforcement communities working 'together on this issue.

           Also in preparation for this meeting, we have worked with the
   Departments of Justice and Treasury to draft an executive order on this
   issue. The order starts with a preamble expressing, in general but strong
   terms, opposition to the use of racial profiling as a tool of law
   enforcement. The order then directs federal law enforcement agencies to
   set up a system to collect data on the race, ethnicity, color, and gender
   of the persons they stop, search, or otherwise examine. Within one year
   of implementing this system, the Attorney General must report the data
   collected and make any appropriate recommendations on how to promote
   greater fairness in federal law enforcement.   Justice, Treasury, and the
   DPC believe that this order would constitute an effective way of
   demonstrating federal leadership in this area.   The executive order
   essentially would do at the federal level what the civil rights community
   most wants done at the state and local levels (and what legislation by
   Congressman Conyers would require): institute a strong system of data
   collection and reporting to determine and disclose exactly where racial
   and other discrimination exists in traffic stops and other contacts with
   law enforcement.

          Chris Edley has proposed a different kind of executive order,
  which would expressly prohibit (though, as explained below, perhaps with
  an exception) federal law enforcement officers from taking race,
  ethnicity, and other specified traits into account when making stop and
  search decisions.  This approach would require you to confront quite
  explicitly a difficult issue (which the data collection order allows you
  to avoid, at least for now): whether to allow the U.S. Border Patrol to
  continue its current practice of using a personD,s perceived national
  origin or ethnicity (essentially, whether the person looks Hispanic) in
  deciding what cars to search near the border. The Edley executive order
AiP.MS Email System                                                                     Page 2 of2
would either (1) effectively prohibit this practice, in the face of the
strong view of both the INS and Main Justice that it is an integral part
of effective border enforcement, or (2) include a specific provision
allowing the Border Patrol (the largest federal law enforcement agency and
the one that most regularly conducts traffic stops) to continue this
practice notwithstanding that it at least appears inconsistent with the
general principles underlying the order. Because DOJ, Treasury, and the
CounselD,s Office object to the first approach on substantive grounds
(believing that where national origin is an element of the suspected
criminal offense, this kind of practice is both appropriate and necessary)
and because DOJ and the DPC object to the second approach on political
grounds (believing that it will cause a firestorm within the Hispanic
community), all your agency and White House advisors oppose EdleyD,s
alternative executive order.

        A more difficult question concerns whether to issue any executive
order on Wednesday.  The Justice Department strongly believes that the
data collection order is necessary to show that we are making progress on
this issue and doing something more than just talking.    Both Justice and
Treasury also believe deeply in the need for data collection and
reporting, and worry that if we do not issue this order now, we also will
find reasons not to issue it in the future.    CounselD,s Office, on the
other hand, recommends that you put off issuing the data collection order
and simply engage in general discussion of racial profiling at the
conference. Chuck notes that the order may displease both sides of the
debate -- the civil rights community because it does not expressly
prohibit all federal law enforcement officers from engaging in all kinds
of racial profiling, the law enforcement community because it does demand
collection and reporting of racial and other data (which most law
enforcement groups strongly oppose at the local level). He also notes
that we will be issuing this controversial order before any members of the
civil rights and law enforc;:ement communities have had a chance to speak
with you directly on the issue, perhaps appearing to preempt the very
discussion in which you will be participating.

        DPC believes this is a close issue, but ultimately comes down on
the side of releasing the executive order on Wednesday. To the extent
that release of this order on Wednesday will provoke criticism on one side
or the other (or both), we do not think the order will become any less
controversial with the passage of time.   (We are mindful that the crime
bill is being marked up this week by the House Judiciary Committee and
that the support of the law enforcement community for our crime proposals
is important; we believe, however, that through careful consultations, we
can minimize any adverse effect of this executive action on the broader
debate in Congress.)  We also believe,' as noted above, that this executive
order does something useful and allows us to exercise leadership in this
area.

_____ Sign the executive order to collect data on federal law enforcement
stops.


      Do not sign the executive order to collect data on federal law
enforcement stops.


      LetD,s discuss.




