RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E      (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JUL-1995 10:15:50.60

SUBJECT: Late night session

TO: Jon Yarowsky                              YAROWSKY J      (WHO)
READ:27-JUL-1995 12:48:05.83

TO: Cheryl D. Mills                           MILLS C      (WHO)
READ:26-JUL-1995 19:10:46.77

TO: John Tanner                               TANNER J      (WHO)
READ:26-JUL-1995 10:25:06.98

TEXT:
A quick summary of yesterday's late night session.    The two religious experts
made the case that Koresh was coming out soon, that a major breakthrough had
occurred on the 14th, etc.   This testimony fit with the two lawyers' testimony
earlier in the day, and allowed Republicans to press the case that if only the
FBI had waited, all would have ended well. The implication was that people in
Washington (exactly who was never made clear) made the decision to go forward
without knowing what those closer to the situation knew: that a corner had been
turned in the negotiations with Koresh.
The questioning of the Rangers was uneventful.    They effectively defused the
controversy surrounding their conversations with Noble, in part by pointing out
that they had equally detailed conversations with Republican staff members, in
part by looking incorruptible.   They criticized some aspects of the operation
and 'supported others; in general, no one got very much out of them. All the
members participated in a kind of contest as to who could suck up to them (the
Rangers) more.
MOST IMPORTANT: At one point, out of the blue, Buyer stated the following
theory:   In April 1993, a new administration was going through some rough times
-- on both the domestic and foreign policy scenes.    That administration, in a
panic over its falling poll numbers, determined to use Waco as an opportunity to
"do something" (i.e., anything), in an effort to look decisive and presidential.
 In its effort to appear strong, the administration ignored the counsel of those
on the ground etc.   In response, Congressman Green rebuked Buyer for making
allegations with no real basis.    (Among other things, Green noted that Pres
Clinton would be grateful now for the approval ratings he had in the spring of
1993. )




