RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E       (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-NOV-1995 16:23:48.18

SUBJECT: Option 9

TO: Martha Foley                                FOLEY M    (WHO)
READ: 7-NOV-1995 08:01:57.75

TEXT:
         I am sending you a copy of Rutzick's remarks on the Option 9 provision
of the Rescissions Act (2001(d».     It is unclear to me exactly what Rutzick is
saying in these remarks. He is, of course, making the same sort of argument as
he did in the 318 context, pointing out that the language of the Act refers to
the area described in the Forest Plan and not to the particular sales
contemplated by that plan.    But he seems unsure how far to take this argument.
He might be saying that 2001(d) ALLOWS the administration to make sales that do
not comply with the Forest Plan when those sales are on lands described in the
Forest Plan.    Alternatively, he might be saying that 2001(d) MANDATES the
administration to make sales that do not comply with the Forest Plan when those
sales are on lands described in the Forest Plan.     I THINK that in this
transcript he's making the first (permissive) argument, rather than the second
 (mandatory) argument     but even if so, I suspect we'll hear the second argument
sooner or later.
         His argument on this score seems to me weaker than it was in the 318
context.    The language of 2001(d) suffers from similar problems as the ones
we've seen before: the terms "covered by Option 9" and "described in" Option 9
follow the word "land," not "sales." But the legislative history is very good'
for us: both the Conference Report and the Senate report refer to "sales allowed
under the Forest Plan" and most (though not all) of the floor statements are to
the same effect.    The intent was pretty clearly to ensure that the
.l\dministration would meet the commitment of the Forest Plan, rather than force
the Administration to go beyond it.     (And what exactly would 2001(d) require if
Rutzick is right? That the government make all possible sales within this area?
If not that, what? That is, if the standards of the Forest Plan do not continue
to govern sales within this area, what standards do apply? What sales is the
government to make?)    I would bet that notwithstanding the language, most courts
would rule against Rutzick on this point.
         Let me know whether you disagree or want to discuss this matter further.
         Meantime, Judge Dwyer retained jurisdiction over the six previously
enjoined or withdrawn sales,but indicated pretty strongly that he was waiting
to see whether Judge Hogan believes these sales to fall within the scope of his
order.   I would bet that in the next few days (1) Hogan will make clear that
those sales fall within his order and (2) Dwyer will then lift his injunction.
If that happens, these sales become essentially the same as all the other sales
released, and the case for NOT releasing them becomes difficult.




