RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E      (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-MAY-1996 08:20:29.96

SUBJECT: new version products

TO: Todd Stern                                  STERN T    (WHO)
READ: 2-MAY-1996 08:21:16.05

TEXT:
here it is
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 2-MAY-1996 08:19:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Elena Kagan

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
               -     -
To the House of Representatives:

        I am returning without my approval H.R. 956, the so
o
-called
Common Sense Product Liability Legal Reform Act of 1996.
         I support real "common sense product liability reform." To
deserve that label, however, legislation must adequately protect
the interests of consumers, in addition to the interests of
manufacturers and sellers.   Further, legislation must respect the
important role of the States in our Federal system.   Congress
could have passed legislation, appropriately limited in scope and
balanced in application, meeting these tests.   Had Congress done
so, I would have signed the bill gladly.   Congress, however,
chose not to do so, deciding instead to retain provisions in the
bill that I made clear I could not accept.
        H:R. 956 inappropriately intrudes on state authority, and
does so in a way that tilts the legal playing field against
consumers. While some federal action in this area is proper
because no one State can alleviate nationwide problems in the
tort system, the States should have, as they always have had,
primary responsibility for tort law.   The States traditionally
have handled this job well, serving as laboratories for new ideas
and making needed reforms.   This bill unduly interferes with that
process in products cases; moreover, it does so in a way that
peculiarly disadvantages consumers. As a rule, this bill
displaces state law only when that law is more favorable to
consumers; it defers to state law when that law is more helpful
to manufacturers and sellers.   I cannot accept, absent compelling
reasons, such a one
LJ
-way street of federalism.
        Apart from the general structure of the bill, specific
provisions of H.R. 956 unfairly disadvantage consumers and their
families.  Consumers should be able to count on the safety of the
products they purchase.  And if these products are defective and
cause harm, consumers should be able to get adequate compensation
for their losses.  Certain provisions in this bill work against
these goals, preventing some injured persons from recovering the
full measure of their damages and increasing the possibility that
defective goods will come onto the market as a result of


intentional misconduct.
        In particular, I object to the following provisions of the
bill, which subject consumers to too great a risk of harm:
        First, as I previously have stated, I oppose wholly
eliminating joint liability for noneconomic damages such as pain
and suffering, because such a change would prevent many persons
from receiving full compensation for injury.  When one wrongdoer
cannot pay its portion of the judgment, the other wrongdoers, and

not the innocent victim, should have to shoulder that part of the
award.   Traditional law accomplishes this result.  In contrast,
this bill would leave the victim to bear these damages on his or
her own. Given how often companies that manufacture defective
products go bankrupt, this provision has potentially large
consequences.
         This provision is all the more troubling because it unfairly
discriminates against the most vulnerable members of our society
-- the elderly, the poor, children, and nonworking women -- whose
injuries often involve mostly noneconomic losses.   There is no
reason for this kind of discrimination. Noneconomic damages are
as real and as important to victims as economic damages.   We
should not create a tort system in which people with the greatest
need of protection stand the least chance of receiving it.
         Second, as I also have stated, I oppose arbitrary ceilings
on punitive damages, because they endanger the safety of the
public.   Capping punitive damages undermines their very purpose,
which is to punish and thereby deter egregious misconduct.    The
provision of the bill allowing judges to exceed the cap if
certain factors are present helps to mitigate, but does not cure
this problem, given the clear intent of Congress, as expressed in
the Statement of Managers, that judges should use this authority
only in the most unusual cases.
         In addition, I am concerned that the Conference Report fails
to fix an oversight in Title II of the bill, which limits actions
against suppliers of materials used in devices implanted in the
body.   In general, Title II is a laudable attempt to ensure the
supply of materials needed to make life
o
-saving medical devices,
such as artificial heart valves. But as I believe even many
supporters of the bill agree, a supplier of materials who knew or
should have known that the materials, as implanted, would cause
injury should not receive any protection from suit. Title II's
protections'must be clearly limited to non
o
-negligent suppliers.
        My opposition to these Senate
[J
-passed provisions were known
prior to the Conference on the bill.  But instead of addressing
these issues, the Conference Committee took several steps
backward, in the direction of the bill approved by the House.
        First, the Conference Report seems to expand the scope of
the bill, inappropriately applying the limits on punitive and
noneconomic damages to negligent entrustment actions -- lawsuits,
for example, against a gun dealer who knowingly sells a gun to a
convicted felon or a bar owner who knowingly serves a drink to an
obviously inebriated customer.  I believe that such suits should
go forward unhindered.  Some in Congress have argued that the
change made in Conference is technical in nature, so that the

bill still exempts these actions.  But I do not read the change
in this way -- and in any event, I do not believe that a victim


of a drunk driver should have to argue in court about this
matter.  Congress should not have made this last
o
-minute change,
creating this unfortunate ambiguity, in the scope of the bill.
         In addition, the Conference Report makes certain changes
that though sounding technical, may cut off a victim's ability to
sue a negligent manufacturer.   The Report deletes a provision
that would have stopped the statute of limitations from running
when a bankruptcy court issues the automatic stay that prevents
suits from being filed during bankruptcy proceedings. The effect
of this seemingly legalistic change will be that some persons
harmed by companies that have entered bankruptcy proceedings (as
makers of defective products often do) will lose any meaningful
opportunity to bring valid claims.
         Similarly, the Conference Report reduces the statute of
repose to fifteen years (and less if states so provide), and
appliei the statute to a wider range of goods, including
handguns. This change, which bars a suit against a maker of an
older product even if that product has just caused injury, also
will preclude some valid suits.
         In recent weeks" I have heard from many victims of defective
products, whose efforts to recover compensation this bill would
have frustrated.   I have heard from a woman who would not have
received full compensatory damages under this bill for the death
of a child because one wrongdoer could not pay his portion of the
judgment.   I have heard from women whose suits against makers of
defective contraceptive devices -- and the punitive damages
awarded in those suits -- forced the products off the market, in
a way that this bill's cap on punitives would make much harder.
I have heard from persons injured by products more than fifteen
years old, who under this bill could not bring suit at all.
         Injured people cannot be left to suffer in this fashion;
furthermore, the few companies that cause these injuries cannot
be left, through lack of a deterrent, to engage in misconduct.    I
therefore must return the bill that has been presented to me.
The bill would undermine the ability of courts to provide relief
to victims of harmful products and thereby endanger the health
and safety of the entire American public. There is nothing
"common sense" about such "reforms" to product liability law.
================== END ATTACHMENT    1 ==================




http://172:28.127.30:8082/ARMS/servletigetEmaiIArchive?URL] ATH=/n1cp-liAnns405/who/ ...   4/1312009
