RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E       (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-0CT-1996 12:08:54.98

SUBJECT: religion matters

TO: Jack M. Quinn                               QUINN_J ) Autoforward to: Cheryl L Sweitzer
READ:28-0CT-1996 18:07:24.96

TO: Kathleen M. Wallman                         WALLMAN KM    (WHO)
READ:28-0CT-1996 13:05:12.89

TEXT:
1.   I've talked with Seth about reworking the Aguilar brief to make it more
supportive -- at the very least in tone -- of the Secretary's position on the
merits.   I suspect they will make some changes along these lines, though not to
the extent we would like.    I also urged Seth to change the language in the
brief's conclusion.   Right now it says the Court should grant cert "if the Court
agrees that this is an appropriate case" to reconsider Aguilar.    I asked that
the conclusion state that the Court should grant cert "because this is an
appropriate case" to reconsider Aguilar, which is a phrase used elsewhere in the
brief. We shall see.
2.   I spent some time Friday afternoon talking with lawyers from the AFT and NEA
whom Jen O'Connor referred to me. These groups don't care much about the
Aguilar decision itself; I think they recognize the inanity of that decision.
But they are very concerned that we not articulate a theory that sweeps so
broadly as to suggest the constitutionality of voucher programs.    I was able to
assure these groups that the brief as currently written does not pose this
danger (given that it states no theory at all as to why Aguilar is wrongly
decided). But they still would prefer that the Administration not make a big
deal about this issue, because of what it might suggest about voucher programs.
Jen, I am sure, will have passed this sentiment on to Harold.
3. Relatedly, John Hart thinks there's no need for a big public statement on
Aguilar in order for our position to be helpful within the Catholic community.
He thinks it is more important that we be in a position to make calls to
Catholic groups and leaders, pointing out what we have said in the case.     Along
those lines, he urged that we try to strengthen the SG's brief as much as
possible; he thinks that the groups will be quite attuned to the level of
enthusiasm expressed in the brief regarding the Secretary's position.
4.  Finally, on the workplace EO, I am waiting for Mark Stern to get me comments
from the other members of the drafting committee on the draft he authored. He
says he expects to get me those comments by wednesday; if that's so, I'll have a
draft ready by Friday at the latest.    I've told DOJ people that we have no
problem giving our draft to them before giving it to the religious groups, but
that we would expect them to get back to us quickly and not to nickel-and-dime
us to death.   I've also talked to Ellen Vargas, the counsel for the EEOC, about
a meeting between Jack and Gil Casellas. Does it make sense to do that meeting
this week (before my draft is ready) or should we put it off until next week?




