 RECORD TYPE:   PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

 CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E       (WHO)

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-MAR-1996 13:02:58.99

 SUBJECT: new version

 TO: Jon Yarowsky                                YAROWSKY J      (WHO)
 READ:28-MAR-1996 18:34:10.97

 TO: Ellen S. Seidman                            SEIDMAN E      (OPD)
 READ:14-MAR-1996 13:51:33.69

 TO: Sally Katzen                                KATZEN S      (OMB)
 READ:14-MAR-1996 15:22:00.82

 TO: James J. Jukes                              JUKES J      (OMB)
 READ:14-MAR-1996 14:57:37.29

 TEXT:


 PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
         The Administration opposes, and the President will veto, the
 Conference Report on H.R. 956 in its current form.
         The Administration would support the enactment of limited
 but meaningful product liability reform at the federal level.
 Any legislation, however, must fairly balance the interests of
 consumers with those of manufacturers and sellers.  Further, any
 legislation must respect the important role of the states in our
 federal system.  The Conference Report fails to meet these
 requirements. On the basis of a distorted set of findings, which
 for example fails to recognize that the current increase in
 litigation is attributable to commercial suits between
 corporations rather than consumer
 o
 -initiated product liability
 actions, H.R. 956 sweeps too broadly in overhauling the product
 liability system.
          As a general matter, product liability reform is the
 responsibility and prerogative of the states, rather than of
 Congress.   This is an area in which states have served as
 laboratories, testing and developing new ideas and making needed
 reforms.   As in other spheres of government, proponents of
 federal restrictions on traditional state prerogatives bear the
 burden of persuasion in justifying new federal intervention.   For
 several provisions in particular, noted below, this burden has
 not been met.
          Moreover, the Conference Report unfairly tilts the legal
 playing field to the disadvantage of consumers.   Many provisions
 of H.R. 956, such as those dealing with punitive damages and the
 statute of repose, displace state law only when that law is more
 favorable to the consumer; when state law is more favorable to
 manufacturers and sellers, it remains in operation. This
 Irone
 o
 -way preemption" too greatly shifts the balance away from
 consumers.  So too do several specific provisions, noted below,
 that would impede the ability of injured persons to gain fair and
 adequate recovery.
         In particular, the Administration opposes Section 108, which
 imposes an artificial ceiling on the amount of punitive damages


llRMS EmaIl System                                                                       Page 2 of2
    ),   r....
that may be awarded in a products liability action.  As the
Administration has previously stated, statutory caps are improper
because they ignore the fundamental purpose of punitive awards:
to punish and deter.  The so
o
-called additur provision, allowing
judges to exceed the ceiling in certain rare circumstances, does
not solve this problem, especially given the gloss given to that
provision in the Statement of Managers, which says that

"occasions for additional awards will be very limited indeed."
Section 108 invites a wealthy potential wrongdoer to weigh the
risks of a capped punitive award against the potential gains or
profits from the wrongdoing.
        The Administration also opposes Section 110, which would
abolish joint
o
-and
o
-several liability for noneconomic damages (most
notably, pain and suffering).   This provision would severely and
unfairly discriminate against those innocent victims who suffer
mostly noneconomic damages, including elderly citizens and others
with little future income.  Noneconomic damages are as real and
as important to victims as economic damages; those who suffer
such damages, like all other victims, should not have to bear the
burden of rounding up every conceivable defendant; neither should
they suffer if one defendant has gone bankrupt.
        In addition, the Conference Report takes a large step
backward from the Senate version in deleting a provision that
would have tolled the statute of limitations in the event of a
stay or injunction against an action.   such a provision is
critical when a potential defendant goes bankrupt, as recently
happened in cases involving asbestos and the dalkon shield.   In
such a case, the bankruptcy court will issue a stay pending the
completion of its proceedings; if the statute of limitations is
not tolled, many injured persons will lose their claims.
        Finally, the Conference Report completely fails to address
one significant problem: the increasingly familiar situation of a
foreign national who is unavailable to receive process for a
defective product put in the stream of commerce in the United
States. A fair system of justice would ensure that foreign
manufacturers are held to the same high standard of
responsibility as are domestic manufacturers.
        The Conference Report includes some good and useful
provisions.  In particular, Title II is a laudable attempt to
ensure that suppliers of biomaterials will provide sufficient
quantities of their products to manufacturers of medical devices.
The Administration is committed to working with Congress to
address this issue.
        The President, however, will have to veto the Conference
Report, if presented to him in its present form, because of its
provisions on punitive damages and non
o
-economic damages, both of
which interfere unduly with state prerogatives and unfairly skew
the legal playing field away from consumers.




