RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-MAY-1997 16:00:37.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Q's and A's

TO: Laura Emmett    ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on OS/21/97 04:00
PM ---------------------------




William R. Kincaid
OS/21/97 03:36:11 PM
Record Type:    Record

To: .    Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:      Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP
Subject:         Draft Q's and A's

Elena--

Attached are two documents containing the text of most of the education
Q's and A's that we would like to include in the President's briefing book
for tonight.   I may be sending you a few more later this afternoon, and I
plan to put them in more of a logical order and consistent format,  Please
let me know if these look ok.

~hanks.




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D41]MAIL49301314J.116 to ASCII,_
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043B10E0000010A02010000000205000000DE63000000020000075CB6E10F18782EF9E633
C23DDB4D101D18A907C7FC812E24E09150121614250E7F800DOC6260237915DC4F8FD3AFF89BCO
4EBFC436D417FA4D6221F3EA079B7DA1227AB1C713A4DB1AB840C9AO72611B4905BB1FD522CE36
38A809B53F88D5CDDC83E961076D350223C2DBCE6467F5A3356F46F76CBC9DE5875D70369A6DF6
2313CA6FB4C95B1A9B5780960F8313E7381CBD18D1FBF78CF99BB859EC08C997DBB58A5C6268F7
7063E262B451A3EF01AA484EFF5DD789005090C426A1CB5042A365C8E3EAADECIOD20C339D8B89
A50B88D12186A09B7171BB668018CF16034B37719E9F7A4B9EA021BCA192407519D30E717D545F
BB5D6C831C5F3251C55F0873505260CF1B2738F5938387A210CDD33DABCBBBOEC41821526F3C22
1971B9B4AD846378BFD30F3E9398AAC5CA8A8FOD637C37DF2C0536422FFB2AB3B7B248CFC4115C
C2455C9993206F37FC010211B4D3DB76556CF79C2B8C355B1C676DF71D9F4569B15F8D2A761D91
8C87815FBBA15C6FF2E51BE3517A70A6A914BCBB44F14677159C9FBC8AD71380BB7D276F198018
386C04FCE5FB1E9CC780106D2561A11FFDA2DB4E7841DD857D8A8FD19A3E3B5CDC7EBBEE5C9A88
32EA91F169428423C99B8978AC96EBA6578FDC4185A4F6C88354D89B9180FA1DCEC9DE3EF4247B
BFA05155A40200A400000000000000000000000055010000003AOO0000F80A0000092501000000
06000000320B000008020100000010000000380B0000086E01000000AD000000480BOOOOOB3002
00000034000000F50B0000081D0100000000000000290C00000055OB0003004E000000290COOOO
08770100000040000000770C000008340100000014000000B70COO000055050001004EOOOOOOCB
OC00000055010002003C000000190D000000550100000032000000550D00000055010000004200



Q.     I am concerned about keeping our schools safe and disciplined. I understand that
       the new special education law (IDEA) just passed by Congress stilI makes it difficult
       to discipline disruptive students who are disabled. How can the other students learn
       if teachers can't maintain order?

A.    First, let me point that the federal special education law, first passed in the 1970's, has
      been essential for providing education opportunities for children with disabilities. Before
      that law was passed, many children with disabilities were denied an education. Since the
      law was passed, educational opportunities for children with disabilities have increased.
      dramatically, because the law guarantees an education to these children. This is a good
      thing, because the education of every child is important, because education is the way for
      for all of our people to become productive and independent citizens. I am proud to be
      able to sign, next month, the bill continuing this law in effect.

      Second, I agree that it is very important for all children that classrooms be orderly places
      where children can learn and teachers can teach. While maintaining the responsibility to
      provide children with disabilities with a free and appropriate education, this new bill
      strengthens the ability of teachers and principals to deal with disruptive or dangerous
      students, including those with disabilities. It does this by:

            making it easier for principals to remove children with disabilities who bring a
             gun, weapon or drugs to school, or who pose a danger to themselves, their
             teachers or their classmates from the clasroom, while continuing to provide them
             with an education in another setting.
            making it easier to address a child's behavior problems early on -- before they get
             out of hand -- by requiring that these be considered in the development of an
             Individual Education Plan, and by making the regular classroom teacher a part of
             the team that develops the plan.

      Finding the right balance between the protection of individual rights and the needs of a
      larger group is often a difficult issue. I am pleased that the Congress, with an
      overwhelming bipartisan majority, has found a way to strike that balance.


Goals 2000 and School-to-Work Controversies
Q.     Aren't these tests just another version of your Goals 2000 program, in which the
       federal government promotes outcomes-based education, politically-correct history,
       and a federal takeover of our schools?

A.    No. Goals 2000 provides federal support for state and local efforts to raise academic
      standards in the basic skills and core academic subjects, and for local, bottom up efforts


                                               1

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
       requirement for outcomes based education or any other particular approach.

       With regard to a"federal takeover" of local schools, that simply isn't accurate. Goals 2000
       supports local control, not federal control. You don't have to take my word for this.
       Harrison County and some 40 other school systems in West Virginia have received Goals
       2000 funds. You should ask teachers, principals, school board members or parents in
       those communities if Secretary Riley and the U.S. Department of Education, have come
       in and set their curriculum or otherwise tried to tell them what to do.

       The national tests we are discussing today are focused on basic reading and math skills
       that all students should master. They are not part of Goals 2000 in any way, and you
       don't have to give the tests in order to keep receiving Goals 2000 funds. However, I
       believe every states should participate in Goals 2000 and in these tests. They are both
       ways of helping our students reach for the highest possible standards.

Q.     The School-to-Work program has been somewhat controversial in West Virginia. Is
       it true that School-to-Work tracks kids into inferior programs of study with low
       academic standards and requires them to make job decisions in elementary and
       middle schools?

A.     No. The School-to-Work Program is designed to give students the academic and on-the-
       job-training to prepare them for high skill jobs and further education. School-to-Work
       does not in any way track students into certain career paths, nor limit their options. It
       gives students and parents information and opportunities to explore a wide range of career
       options, and it helps make sure that students learn basic and advanced academic skills
       that will prepare them either for work or for college.

Testing and Standards Issues
Q.     Do you believe students should be required to pass these tests in order to be
       promoted to the next grade level?

       I believe that if we set standards for students, they should be required to meet the
       standards in order to be promoted from elementary to middle school, from middle school
       to high school, and before graduating from high school. When I was Governor, we
       required students to pass an 8th grade test before moving into high school. While some
       students had difficulty passing the test the first time, almost everyone did ultimately. We
       gave extra help to students who needed it, including summer school. And over time, the
       percentage of students who passed the test on the first time increased, as students,
       teachers and parents came to understand how well the did mattered.

       I believe every state should require students to meet standards before they move on.
       Every state gives their own tests, in addition to these national tests. Each state will need


                                                 2

                                                                  Automated Records Management System .
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion




Q.     You say these are "national, not feder~I" standards and tests. What exactly does
       that mean, especially since the U.S. Department of Education is going to develop
       them?

A.     It means that while the federal goverment will fund the development of the tests, it is not
       in charge of what the tests measure, when they are administered, or how they are used in
       schools and communities around the country.

      The tests will be based on the existing National Assessment of Education Progress, which
      is already used in more than 40 states. The content for these tests -- the reading and math
      skills they measure -- have already been determined by outside groups of teachers,
      curriculum specialists and others, and by agreement of state education officials. These
      content frameworks for reading and math are widely accepted and are based on
      widespread input, and strong state involvement. They truly are national standards, built
      from the bottom up. And they are challenging for our youngsters. The new tests I have
      proposed will measure the same math and reading skills that NAEP already measures.

      The federal government will pay for the development of these tests, just as it helps pay
      for other research and development in education and other policy areas, and just as it has
      paid for the National Assessment of Education Progress for almost 30 years. Providing
      good information and good tools to improve our schools has long been part of the federal
      government's role in education, and should remain so.

Vouchers
Q:   I think voucher programs provide an opportunity to some parents they otherwise
     would not have -- to send their child to a private or parochial school. What is your
      position on school vouchers?

A:    I believe there are better ways to provide greater school choice to students and their
      families. One very good way is to have every state pass a charter school law that allows
      parents and teachers to start new public charter schools that stay open only as long they
      do a good job. In fact, I have proposed nearly doubling the charter school start-up
      program (to $100 million next year) to help start 3,000 charter schools over the next
      several years.

      While I support public school choice, I oppose federally funded tuition vouchers for
      private elementary and secondary schools. I also oppose state funded and locally funded
      vouchers, which take money away from public schools.


                                                3


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Q:    Why doesn't the budget plan include help for school construction?

A:    This is a critical need, and I have proposed a plan for jump-starting State and local school
      construction and renovation efforts. Unfortunately, there was considerable resistance in
      the budget negotiations to including it in the agreement. I am disappointed that it could
      not be included.

            We should remember that if we failed to reach agreement on a balanced budget
             plan, that would have made local school construction efforts more difficult, by
             raising interest rates.

            On balance, the agreement was a tremendous success on education overall.

            Within the context of the agreement, I will continue to look for opportunities to
             address this problem.




Q:    Won't Your HOPE Scholarship plan cause college tuitions to go up even more thatn
      they already have been?

A:    Actually, Federal aid does not seem to have much of an effect on tuition costs. When
      Federal college aid was rising in the 1970s, real college tuitions remained fairly steady.
      But when real Federal aid dropped slightly during the 1980s, that is when tuitions rose
      most sharply. One study suggests that is partly because colleges are trying to provide aid
      to the lowest-income students, and to do that they increase tuition for everyone else. By
      restoring the Federal government's commitment to financial aid -- for both low-income
      and middle-income families -- we are helping to reduce one ofthe pressures that
      increases tuition and fees.


Q:    Will the IRS be looking at my grades to see if I'm eligible for the HOPE
      Scholarship??

                                               4


                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
      enforce grades may be going a little too far, and we're going to try to find a way to
      simplify the program."]

A:    The IRS would not be looking at student transcripts. But I do want to make sure that we
      are not only helping people pay for college, but also that they have an incentive to work
      hard once they are there. A new study from Georgia State University suggests that the
      grade requirement in Georgia's HOPE Scholarship plan has helped some of the
      borderline students, those who started out very close to the B average, to perform better in
      college.

      I have gotten some feedback about the grade requirement in my HOPE Scholarship
      plan, and Secretary Riley and Secretary Rubin will be working closely with
      Congress to make sure that we encourage students to work hard, but that we do it in
      a simple way, without imposing any undue burdens on taxpayers or colleges.

Q:    DOES THE BUDGET AGREEMENT CUT STUDENT LOANS?

A-'   No, it will not affect student loan borrowers in any way. There are some savings to
      taxpayers that we can achieve by making government more efficient and reducing
      subsidies to middlemen -- something that I proposed in my Budget in January -- and the
      negotiators agreed to some of those changes to help bring the deficit down by $1.7
      billion. But the agreement makes it clear that there can be no cuts in benefits or
      availability of loans. (And colleges may continue to choose to participate in the Direct
      Loan program or the guarantee system).



Q:    WITH THE TAX CUTS, WILL THERE BE ANY MONEY LEFT FOR
      EDUCATION PROGRAMS?

A:    The budget agreement includes the largest increase in our investment in education in 30
      years, and the largest single boost in college aid since the G.I. Bill. It includes:

            Roughly $35 billion in tax cuts for higher education, consistent with the HOPE
             Scholarship and $10,000 tax deduction.

            Pell Grant Expansion. Includes the largest increase in two decades -- a funding
             boost of25%. The maximum award will reach $3,000, an increase of$300. In
             the 1998 budget alone, an additional 348,000 students will receive grants: 130,000
             young people from moderate-income families, and 218,000 low income students
             over the age of 24.


                                               5



                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
    classroom, every classroom is connected to the Internet, all teachers are trained,
    and that high quality software and on-line resources are available to help schools
    integrate technology into the curriculum so that students can become
    technologically literate.

   Head Start. Continued expansion toward my goal of 1 million kids in 2002.

   America Reads. A child literacy initiative consistent with the America Reads
    Challenge, to mobilize volunteers to help every child learn to read well and
    independently by the end of third grade.

   Job Corps and other Job Training. A 12% increase for job training programs,
    including continued expansion of Job Corps




                                    6


                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

A:   Between the 1990-91 academic year and the 1995-96 academic year, overall price
     inflation was only 17 percent, but the average tuition and fees at public colleges increased
     by 31 percent and at private colleges increased by 33 percent. Some of the increase is the
     result of research and staffing costs that increased faster than inflation. At the public
     colleges, funding from State legislatures did not grow as fast as costs did. And at private
     colleges, while tuition went up, so did financial aid that the college was providing (in
     other words, not everyone was actually paying the full tuition and fees).




Q:   WHAT IS THE READING PROGRAM THAT WAS INCLUDED IN THE
     BUDGET DEAL?

A:   The agreement includes my plan to help make sure that every child learns to read well
     and independently by the end of third grade. Secretary Riley and Harris Wofford, the
     CEO of the Corporation for National and Community Service, will be working with
     Congress on some of the details. What I have proposed includes:

           America's Reading Corps: 25,000 reading specialists and 11,000 AmeriCorps
            members serving as recruitors imd coordinators, to enlist an army of one million
            volunteer tutors.

           Parents as First Teachers: Grants to foster effective programs that help parents
            help their children to become successful readers (e.g. HIPPY).



                                              7


                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Q:   DOES TUTORING MAKE A DIFFERENCE? AREN'T TEACHERS MOST
     IMPORTANT.

A:   Even the best teachers will tell you that some children need extra help outside the
     classroom hours in order to catch up. And the research shows that tutoring programs that
     provide consistent help, with trained tutors, can make a big difference. For example:

     --In Simpson County, Kentucky, 25 AmeriCorps members helped second graders jump 3
     reading levels in one year

     --At Hands on Atlanta, in the first three years of AmeriCorps involvement, the schools
     have seen an 11 percent increase in performance on national standardized tests in reading
     and in math, and 25 percent few discipline problems.

     --At Reading One-to-One in Texas, with just a semester of tutoring, children improve one
     full reading level.




Q:   How will these tests a톐fect students who participate in home schooling?

A:   In a legal sense, it will not affect those students at all. No student in a home school will
     be required to take these tests, though they will be able to if they want to. Every parent
     will have access to the tests on the Internet each year, so if they want to see for
     themselves how well their students are measuring up against these standards, they can
     find out.




                                               8

                                                                           n ecords Management System
                                                                 Automated N
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
     don't want my 12 year old to see some of the pornography on the internet. What are
     you going to do about that?

Answer:    I am committed to ensuring that our children do not get exposed to
           indecent material and will take all constitutional measures to
           make sure that they don't. I signed the Communications Decency
           Act and we are currently defending that law in court. If the Act is
           invalidated, I will carefully consider alternative routes to the same
           goal. We are also exploring a V-chip for the Internet that will help
           parents screen out this kind of material.




                                         9




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dwnp Conversion
                       Thursday, May 22, 1997

                       DRAFT 0 & A's for the President

National Standards/National Tests

Question:   Standards: Why is the development of national standards so
            important now?

Answer:     Student achievement is not improving fast enough. Today's
            economy demands higher and higher levels of skill and education
            to succeed in all types of jobs and far too many children are not
            meeting the standards that will prepare them for tomorrow. High
            standards pull young people up and encourage them to work
            harder and create high expectations for themselves. They also
            provide a benchmark for parents and teachers for what children
            should know and whether they are learning it. Places that have set
            high standards have made progress in student achievement. I
            want that improvement for all our children.

Question:   Standards: How are you going to ensure that all children can
            meet these high standards?

Answer:     First, these tests, together with state and local tests, will help help
            teachers and parents know which children need help and what
            help they need.

            Second, these tests are about lifting our students up, not putting
            them down. We must make sure that our students have safe and
            orderly classrooms, well prepared teachers, access to good
            textbooks, computers and other technology that will connect them
            to the information superhighway.

            I'm doing my part to help by making sure that the federal
            government makes a substantial investment in education. And
            Secretary Riley and the Education Department will continue to
            provide information on the best practices in each area. But the
            primary responsibility lies here with those of you in this room --
            parents, teachers and principals, school board members, others in
            the community and state and local officials. You have the
            responsibility to come together and provide our students with the
            preparation they need, for these standards and for the future.



                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
            students with disabilities in the 4th and 8th grade assessments
            you are developing?

Answer:     We must expect more of all our children, including those with
            disabilities. The Department of Education, which is working with
            education experts to help develop the tests, will make the 4th
            grade reading and 8th grade math tests available to states and
            schools in formats accessible to students with disabilities. In
            addition, schools will be able to get technical assistance and other
            support to help ensure that students with disabilities are
            appropriately included. .


Question:   Why 4th grade reading and 8 th grade math?

Answer:     Reading and math are two of the most basic skills. Children can't
            move ahead in school in any subject if they can't read English by
            the 4th grade. And 8 th grade math is a pivotal point in terms of
            making sure that a student has mastered the mathematics she
            needs to move forward in high school and go to college or into the
            work place.

            Children go to school for the first three years of grade school to
            learn how to read, so they can spend the rest of their years reading
            to learn. There is a strong link between low reading skills, falling
            behind in school, disruptive behavior, and dropping out. Yet,
            about 40% of our children are not learning how to read well and
            independently by the end of third grade, decreasing their chances
            of succeeding in school and in life. We need to change this.

            8th grade math is also a critical turning point for students. At that
            point, students need to have mastered the basics of math --
            including the foundations of algebra and geometry -- so they are
            prepared to go on and take the harder math and science courses
            they need for college preparation or jobs right out of high school.
            In our high technology, international economy, our students will
            need to know more mathematics than most of us adults learned.
            And, having good math skills is increasingly a prerequisitefor
            getting a good job, students who don't take algebra and geometry
            are much less likely to go to college than students who do.

            Unfortunately, right now, the United States is below the



                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex.Dump Conversion
            Many more young people should be taking algebra by the end of
            the 8th grade so they can take more advanced course in high
            school. That is what most 13 year olds are doing around the world.
             Only 25% of our 8th graders have learned algebra -- as opposed to
            almost 100% of students in other industrialized nations. Having a
            national benchmark in math at 8th grade will show whether our
            students are where they should be.

Question:   What about other national standards that have been developed in
            subjects like science and history? Do you support those? Why do
            you focus so much on reading and math?

Answer:     There have been excellent voluntary national standards produced
            in several subjects, such as math, geography, and civics, that
            many states and districts are finding useful as they develop their
            own state and local standards. Other proposed standards, such as
            the controversial history standards, have not been as successful.
            At the national level we are focusing on reading and math because
            they are the first basics, and there is a grassroots, national
            consensus that every student needs to master these two core
            subjects.

Question:   Isn't 4th grade too late for a reading test?

Answer:     No. Children are expected to have made the transition from
            learning to read to reading to learn by the 4th grade. This is the
            critical turning point -- and the point we should measure to see
            that all our students are making it.

            Of course, a short national test in reading does not replace what
            teachers and parents have always done -- paying attention to
            children's progress in learning to read all through the critical early
            childhood years.

Question:   How will these tests differ from existing tests? What will they tell
            us that we don't already know?

Answer:     These tests will provide information to parents and teachers about
            individual student scores and how close a child is to reaching high
            national standards. Currently, there is no way of knowing whether
            your child's progress or your child's school is measuring up to
            national and international standards. Now, each state sets its own



                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           HeX-Dump Conversion
                  difficult for parents to tell how well their child is actually
            doing compared with tough, meaningful national and international
            benchmarks--the kind they will be judged against in the real world.
            These tests will give parents and teachers, wherever they live, an
            opportunity to know how their children are doing.

Question:   Who decides what is on the tests?

Answer:     The tests will be based on the widely accepted frameworks of the
            National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). These
            frameworks are developed by nationally recognized teachers and
            other educators and community leaders, with input from
            thousands of interested parents, teachers and others interested in
            edcuation.

            At present 43 states -- including West Virginia -- participate in the
            NAEP and have agreed that the NAEP frameworks in reading and
            math are good standards for what students should know in these
            critical subjects.


Question:   Will the federal government have my child's test score? Will it be
            private?

Answer:     The federal government will not be collecting individual student
            scores. It will be up to states and communities to do that, if they
            choose to and they will have to keep individual student scores
            confidential.


Question:   What will happen to students who fail the test?

Answer:     We are developing these tests so that parents and teachers get
            accurate information about how students are doing in relation to
            challenging national and international standards. I believe we
            should give extra help--in class, special tutoring after school,
            summer school if necessary--to students who need it. It is up to
            states, community leaders, teachers and parents to determine how
            they will respond to such needs in their community.

            Likewise, it will be up to each state and community how they want
            to use the test results -- and what sanctions they want to provide
            schools and students who aren't doing well. I have encouraged


                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
            advance from school to school, and to hold teachers and schools
            accountable for student performance.


Question:   Do you believe students should be required to pass these tests in
            order to be promoted to the next grade level?

Answer:     I believe that if we set standards for students, they should be
            required to meet the standards in order to be promoted from
            elementary to middle school, from middle school to high school,
            and before graduating from high school. When I was Governor, we
            required students to pass an 8th grade test before moving into
            high school. While some students had difficulty passing the test
            the first time, almost everyone did ultimately. We gave extra help
            to students who needed it, including summer school. And over
            time, the percentage of students who passed the test on the first
            time increased, as students, teachers and parents came to
            understand how well the did mattered.

            I believe every state should require students to meet standards
            before they move on. Every state gives their own tests, in addition
            to these national tests. Each state will need to decide what the
            best combination of tests would be.

Question:   How much will it cost to give the tests?

Answer:     The total cost of developing the new tests will be between $10 - 12
            million per year in 1997 and 1998. The cost of administering the
            new tests is estimated to be $10 - $12 per student, and I've
            proposed that the Department of Education reimburse these costs
            for the first year. This investment is more than worth it to make
            sure we are doing all we can to help students master the basics.


Question:   How will you ensure that teachers are prepared to help students
            meet these high standards?

Answer:     Making sure that our teachers are prepared to teach to these high
            standards is a shared responsibility, primarily among school
            systems, colleges and unversities, states, and the teachers
            themselves.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex.Dump Conversion
            the classroom, and helping them in their first several years. And
            we have to help teachers keep learning while they are on the job.

            We also need standards of excellence for teachers and we've got to
            reward excellence. That's why I support the National Board for
            Professional Teaching Standards, which has deveveloped tough
            teacher standards. Today they are only about 500 nationally
            board certified teachers in the country, and none in West Virginia.
             I think we need at least one master teacher inn every school. I
            hope West Virginia will take steps to do this and I have put money
            in my budget to help.



Question:   How will these tests affect students who participate in home
            schooling?

Answer:     In a legal sense, it will not affect those students at all. No student
            in a home school will be required to take these tests, though they
            will be able to if they want to. Every parent will have access to the
            tests on the Internet each year, so if they want to see for
            themselves how well their students are measuring up against these
            standards, they can find out.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


Question:    Parental Responsibility:     What can you do to make sure parents
              understand what they need to do to make sure their children are
            . ready to start school, and how they can help their children as they
              go through?

Answer:      Over thirty years of research shows that family involvement in
             children's learning is critical to their child's success. There are lots
             of things parents can do to help their children start school ready to
             learn. I strongly urge parents to read to their children starting in
             their earliest years. Schools can provide a welcoming atmosphere
             for parents, while local employers can help by giving paid leave for
             employees to be involved in their children's schools, or provide
             other means for employees to attend parent-teacher conferences or
             volunteer as tutors or mentors. Some of the best employers do it.


Question:    Parental Responsibility: What about parents who can't read and
             write, or have other limitations? How can they help their children
             get ready for and successfully proceed through school?

Answer:     Every parent can help, from the first days of a child's life--by
            talking and singing to them, paying attention to them, and. helping
            them learn their colors and shapes. All parents can help their kids
            in other ways by showing up at school events, asking kids if they
            need help and getting it for them, being active in school activities,
            and giving them a place to do homework and making sure they do
            it. Through programs like Adult Education and Even Start family
            literacy we support local initiatives that assist parents to gain the
            skills they need to help their children and build a better life for
            themselves and their families.


Question:   Business Community Partnerships: More and more, we are
            finding the need for employees with higher levels of training than
            we are seeing coming into the workplace. How can employers like
            me help ensure that more highly qualified candidates will enter the
            workforce?

Answer:     The business community knows as well as any how important high
            standards are in educating our youth. All over the country,


                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
            school communities to provide resources like apprenticeship and
            mentoring programs, after school programs, etc. Last month, over
            200 high-tech industry leaders who hire graduates from across the
            country endorsed my standards and testing initiative because they
            know first hand how important it is to have highly skilled
            graduates entering their workforces. You can help by partnering
            with your local school community.


Question:   Teacher Salaries: I'd like to become a teacher and I think I'd be a
            good one. But I can't afford it. Is there anything the government
            can do to make teacher salaries greater?

Answer      You set the salary for teachers here in West Virginia, just as states
            and local school districts do across America. In this state you have
            made substantial progress on teachers' salaries during the 1990s.
            Through income-contingent student loans, I have worked to make
            it easier for college graduates to enter teaching or pursue other
            service-related professions where starting salaries are relatively
            low.




Question:   Safe Schools: There are stories all the time about people walking
            into schools and shooting kids,.fights, drugs, etc. What is the
            government doing to stop it?

Answer:     I have challenged all schools to put in place high standards of
            discipline and behavior along with tough measures to keep guns
            and drugs out of schools. Last year I protected the Safe and Drug-
            Free Schools and Communities program that supports school
            security, and drug and violence prevention programs in 97 percent
            of our country's school districts. I also support school uniforms as
            one way to deter school violence, and have encouraged
            communities to enforce truancy laws.



Question:   The School-to-Work program has been somewhat controversial in
            West Virginia. Is it true that School-to-Work tracks kids into
            inferior programs of study with low academic standards and


                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
          schools?

Answer:   No. The School-to-Work Program is designed to give students the
          academic and on-the-job-training to prepare them for high skill
          jobs and further education. School-to-Work does not in any way
          track students into certain career paths, nor limit their options. It
          gives students and parents information and opportunities to
          explore a wide range of career options, and it helps make sure that
          students learn basic and advanced academic skills that will
          prepare them either for work or for college.




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
a set submitted by Bob Kittle, Harrison County School Superintendent, who
gathered a group of teachers, students and business and community leaders
to draw up <!luestions they believed the community would like the President to
address).

Question:   Internet Access. With the emphasis on connecting classrooms to
            the Internet, how can our public school children be protected rom
            the harmful aspects of the Internet?

Answer:     I am committed to ensuring that our children do not get exposed to
            indecent material and will take all constitutional measures to
            make sure that they don't. I signed the Communications Decency
            Act and we are currently defending that law in court. If the Act is
            invalidated, I will carefully consider alternative routes to the same
            goal. We are also exploring a V-chip for the Internet that will help
            parents screen out this kind of material.


Question:   E-rate. E-rate funds for communications and Internet connection
            schools and libraries are being made on a first-come, first serve
            bass. Will the funds be available again and how will you ensure
            equity in distribution of funds?

Answer:     Over the next several months, the Federal Communication
            Commission will work with the Department of Education and the
            education community to develop as easy application process for
            schools and libraries to follow. I have asked Secretary Riley and
            FCC Chairman Reed Hundt to work with local educators,
            communities and parents on how to help them understand the E-
            rate and upgrade their schools to take advantage of it. The level of
            the discount will be higher for the schools in disadvantaged
            neighborhoods and in rural schools with higher costs of connecting
            to the Internet.


Question:   Partnerships. What can local school systems do to help
            implement the goals set by the education summits and your
            national initiatives?

Answer:     There are lots of things that local schools can do:

                 Use the national tests and set high standards.


                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                  reward them when they do.

                 Develop and enforce fair standards of conduct for all
                  students.

                 Get the whole community involved in helping young children
                  learn to read. Pediatricians should prescribe reading to
                  parents of infants and preschoolers. College students and
                  others should volunteer to tutor.

                 Keep working, as you are in West Virginia, to make sure
                  every 12 year old can log onto the Internet.

                 Start early in letting students and families know that they
                  will need at least 2 years of postsecondary education.

Question:   Technology. What can the business community do to help the
            educational community to stay up to date with the major
            technological advances that are occurring today?

Answer:     The business community has been one of the biggest supporters of
            our education technology initiative and West Virginia is a national
            leader in the use of technology in the classrooms. Some 85% of
            West Virginia's schools will be connected to the Internet by the end
            of this year and 14,000 educators have been trained to use
            computers for basic skills instruction. I applaud Bell Atlantic-West
            Virginia for its commitment to wiring schools, IBM for its support
            of technology innovation, and Ashland Oil and others for their
            work on behalf of education reform here in the state.


Question:   School to Work. How do I open my business up to the school to
            work program?

Answer:     Business supports school-to-work partnerships because they
            represent an investment in people which yields access to highly
            trained, versatile workers who are certified and knowledgeable in
            all aspects of an industry. I would urge any employer interested in
            getting more involved to talk with their local school system and
            community colleges about how to participate.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        HeX-Dump Conversion
            any money to have after-school programs at schools like mine?

Answer:     My budget includes a new initiative to provide safe havens and to
            extend learning opportunities for children and their faIY!ilies at
            schools across the country. The initiative will help after-school,
            summer and weekend programs get started as Community
            Learning Centers and foster community involvement.


Question:   How can we become a nation of readers?


Answer:     My America Reads Challenge is pursuing several essential
            strategies to help our children learn to read: creating more learning
             opportunities to supplement classroom reading instruction;
                  encouraging parent involvement to help children develop
            readiness skills for reading beginning at birth, as well as
            involvement         throughout the school years; and bringing best
            teaching practices into classrooms.

           The America Reads Challenge legislative proposal specifically
     would build on groundwork laid by classroom teachers, librarians,
     and reading specialists by drawing upon the invigorating spirit of
     community volunteers in tutoring. The proposal encourages family
     and community involvement in the education of America's children
     by linking AmeriCorps members, trained and qualified reading
           professionals, and volunteer tutors to community and school-
     based literacy efforts.

             America Reads also calls for the expansion of Head Start to reach
     one million 3- and 4-year-olds; the strengthening and expansion of
     Title I and Even Start Programs to enhance teaching and learning
     during the school day, as well as family literacy efforts; and finally,
             challenging the private sector and community groups to work with
             schools and libraries.



                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
America Reads Challenge.

       1) Instill a love of reading in your child. Parents are their
      child's first teachers and learning begins at home. By reading
aloud to their children regularly and using TV wisely, parents can
empower their children with the lifelong habit of reading and
learning.

      2) Call a local school or literacy program and volunteer as a
      reading tutor. Many community and civic groups already sponsor
      tutoring programs and always welcome volunteers.

     3) Call 1-800-USA-LEARN and ask to get involved in
READ*WRITE*NOW, a summer reading component of the America
Reads Challenge.

     4) Call the college or university nearest you, or your alma mater,
     to see if it has joined the America Reads Challenge. The best office
     to begin with may be the Financial Aid Offices.




                                                      ".utomated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
