RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JUL-1997 15:22:42.00

SUBJECT:   Outline of new CBEST brief

TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As promised -- Mike's thoughts.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 07/06/97 03:24
PM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
06/29/97 02:05:34 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Outline of new CBEST brief

I've reviewed the outline for the "compromise" CBEST brief, and here's
what I think:

1. The final section of the outline (III) goes beyond the limited
approach we discussed    namely that the brief would object only to the
early version and not to the current version of the test -- because it
poses objections to the whole set of validation studies. If this section
remains in, we are back to the original EEOC brief and objections.

2. Assuming this section is deleted, then the brief essentially argues
that the original validation studies were deficient, demonstrated by the
fact that the state made significant changes in the math portion of the
test in particular after the 1994 Lundquist evaluation study.
Consequently, the unrevised, pre-1995 version of the test lacked
demonstrated validity and job-relatedness, and therefore its use was
unlawful in light of the disparate impact it created.  In addition, the
court committed a serious procedural error when in let the state get away
with either failing to conduct validty studies, or conducting seriously
deficient validty studies, in the pre-1994 period of test administration.

3. The brief doesn't state this, but if this is the essense of the case
we would present, I presume we would take this the next step and suggest
that the appropriate remedy would be to give back pay (or some other
compensation) to any of the plantiffs who take and pass the current
version of the test, and who then go into teaching.  If they can't pass
the test, or no longer want to teach, then I don't think they would be
entitled to some kind of remedy.

4. The brief needs to more clearly make the argument for our standards
and testing policy, along the following lines: .
setting high standards for students is a necessary first step in improving
teaching and learning; this is especially important for students from
disadvantaged background, because they have traditionally suffered from a
"tyranny of low expectations" which has resulted in these students being
exposed to a watered down curriculum which limits their learning
opportunities


testing to see if students are meeting these standards is also essential,
because the test reinforces the standards; drives curriculum and
instruction in the classroom (what gets tested gets taught); lets
students, teachers and parents know if the kids are making progress and on
track; and provides the basis for holding schools accountable for
performance;
raising stadards for students requires setting standards for teachers:
kids can't learn from teachers who lack the basic prerequisite knowledge.
This is especially true for students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
There is considerable evidence to suggest, for example, high poverty
schools are most likely to have the least-well prepared teachers, which
clearly works to the disadvantage of the most disadvantaged kids.
all teachers need to master some basic reading, writing and math skills in
order to teach, because these skills: are likely to be required at some
point in just about every class and in every other setting in which
professional educators (including counselors, principals, school nurses,
etc.) interact with kids; are required in order to build and retain public
confidence in public schools; and, because adults in schools are supposed
to be role models for kids; if they demonstrate that they lack basic skills
  students are expected to learn, they undermine the moral authority of the
school, which is necessary to maintain order and to motivate students
 (who, by virtue of compulsory attendence laws are the involuntary
clientele of the school).
that's why we support the basic idea of requiring prospective teachers to
pass basic skills tests; in fact, we think teachers ought to also be
required to pass more rigorous tests in the subject area in which they
teach, and ought to also be required to demonstrate a level of expertise
in other areas (e.g., pedogagy, classroom management, child development,
etc.) The point here is to clarify that on policy grounds we think basic
skills testing is at one end of a continuum of performance requirements,
and we'd like to see states move to the other, more rigorous, end.
  Because these basic skills tests are so important, and because we expect
more states to adopt even more rigorous testing policies, we think it is
very important that these tests be done right, and especially that they
are consistent with civil rights employment laws.
We also value very highly the goal of increasing the number of· well
prepared, qualified minorities in schools. Because high standards and
well designed licensure tests can be a very important tool for upgrading
teacher prepation (just as standards and tests are a tool for upgrading
teaching and learning for kids), it is important that we make sure that
the tests are in place, done right, and do not needlessly discriminate.
Title VII is the tool for doing this; if Title VII requirements and
procedures are met than we will have valid tests that will serve to
improve teaching.   If not, then they will neither improve teaching nor
increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in the
classroom.
That is why we are appealing the court's decision:   the court set a
precedent for allowing a poorly validated test be used when there was a
disparate impact.   Even though the test is now "fixed", if the part of the
ruling bearing on the pre-1995 test is allowed to stand, than future tests
may be used where they also lack validity, and may be based on much more
demanding standards which could lack the easy "face validity" of basic
skills.

4. I think the    outline above makes a more compelling case than the EEOC
outline for why   standards and testing are important policy tools, and why
enforcing Title   VII is important in this context.   I could imagine
proceeding with   a brief framed along these lines from a policy
perspective.

5. Finally, from a policy point of view, I could be comfortable about
proceeding with a brief along these lines.   I will defer to other's
judgment about the wisdom of this approach froma legal and strategic


standpoint, .  My own instinct is that we still look like we are raising a
relatively small concern about a really big issue, though I am still
thinking about this.

I hope this helps.




