RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-AUG-1998 13:46:18.00

SUBJECT:     Women's Accomps Document - Updated

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
could one of you deal with this? thanks.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 08/24/98 01:46
PM ---------------------------



           Paul J. Weinstein Jr.
           08/24/98 12:39:48 PM

Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc: Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
Subject: Women's Accomps Document - Updated

Please review and give your comments to Robin.
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
08/24/98 12:38 PM ---------------------------



Robin J. Bachman
08/24/98 10:55:35 AM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc: Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
Subject: Women's Accomps Document - Updated

Attached please find a revised version of our Women's accomplishments doc
(it was last updated in January).  I haven't heard back from DPC.  The
Women's Office has a big meeting tomorrow and would really like to
distribute an updated version.

please get back to me today if you have any changes.

Thanks!

Robin
66237
---------------------- Forwarded by Robin J. Bachman/WHO/EOP on 08/24/98
10:49 AM ---------------------------


Robin J. Bachman
08/12/98 07:06:16 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP, Jonathan Orszag/OPD/EOP, Ann F.
Lewis/WHO/EOP
cc: Kelley L. O'Dell/WHO/EOP, Thomas D. Janenda/WHO/EOP, Ruby
Shamir/WHO/EOP
Subject: Women's Accomps Document - Updated

Here is an updated version of a Womens' Accomplishments document we
distributed in January.  Please look it over.  I'd like, if possible, to
get edits by midday Friday. Additions are fine, but I don't want to add
too much more.  Suggested deletions are OK, too.

Paul: Do you mind running it by your guys, or should I go to the various
teams individually?

We (research) are also revising the African American, Latino and Asian
sheets.  They will be forwarded to you hopefully by COB Friday, more
likely next week.

Thanks.     If you have questions, please call.

Robin
66237




Message Sent
To:
Sar-a~h--A-.~B~i-a-n-c~h-l~/70~P~D~/=E=O=P-------------------------------------------

Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OPD/EOP
Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP
Jonathan H. Schnur/OPD/EOP
Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP
Jennifer L. Klein/OPD/EOP




Message Sent
To:
Jen-n=i~f~e-r--L-.~K=l~e-l~톘-/=o~p=D~/=E=O=P~----------------------------------------

Nicole R. Rabner/WHO/EOP
Neera Tanden/WHO/EOP
Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OPD/EOP
Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP
Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP
Christopher C. Jennings/OPD/EOP
Sarah A. Bianchi/OPD/EOP


;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;=== ATTACHMENT   1 ==========;========;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00



                 Supporting Women and Families

EXPANDING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES:

    Protecting Families. The Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) enables workers to take
     up to 12 weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing family member without
    jeopardizing their job. Approximately fi fteen million workers have already benefited
     from FMLA since its enactment. The President also proposed expanding the Family &
    Medical Leave Act to allow workers up to 24 hours per year of unpaid leave for parent-
    teacher conferences or routine medical care for a child.
    Cutting Taxes for 15 Million Working Families by extending the Earned Income Tax
    Credit.
   Increasing the Minimum Wage from $4.25 to $5.15, giving 6 million women a raise.
   Narrowing the Wage Gap. Last year, the median earnings of women working full-time
    increased 2.4 percent. In 1996, the median earnings of women represented 74 percent of
    the median earnings for men, the narrowest gap ever.
   Fighting for Paycheck Equity. Called on Congress to pass legislation to strengthen laws
    prohibiting wage discrimination.
   Signed the Bipartisan Workforce Investment Act reforming America's job training
    system for the 21 st Century.
   Highest Home Ownership Rate in History. There are more than 68 million American
    families who own homes, more than 6 million new homeowners since the President took
    office. Women's home ownership is increasing at a faster rate than the rest of the country
    -- up five percent since the first quarter of 1994.
   Increasing Pension Security. Fought for legislation that has expanded pension coverage,
    made pensions more secure for 40 million American workers and retirees, and simplified
    pension plan administration. Promoting new efforts to encourage retirement savings.
   Saving Social Security First. In 1999, nearly 60 percent of all Social Security
    beneficiaries will be women. President Clinton is committed to save Social Security for
    the 21 st Century and has urged that budget surpluses should be reserved pending Social
    Security reform.


MAKING OUR HOMES AND COMMUNITIES SAFER:

    Putting 100,000 More Police on the Streets. Because of President Clinton's Crime Bill,
    over 77,000 officers are -- or soon will be -- keeping our neighborhoods and
    communities safe, on the way to 100,000. And violent crime has dropped six years in a
    row - the longest period of decline in 60 years.
   Signed the Assault Weapons Ban into law as well as the Brady Bill, which has already
    kept handguns away from 250,000 felons, fugitives and individuals under restraining
    orders related to domestic harassment. The President also signed into law an extension of
    the Brady Law, which prohibits anyone convicted ofa domestic violence offense--



                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       HeX-Dump Conversion
    Signed Megan's Law allowing community-notification of sex offenders.
    Championed the Violence Against Women Act, the cornerstone of the President's
     efforts to fight domestic violence, and created an office at the Department of Justice
     dedicated to combating violence against women.
    More than Tripled Funding to Domestic Violence Shelters and instituted new
     penalties against men who stalk, threaten or abuse women across state lines.
    Established Nationwide 24-Hour Domestic Violence Hotline. The hotline ( 1-800-797-
     SAFE) provides immediate crisis intervention, counseling and referrals for those in need.
      Since the hotline opened, there have been 229,000 calls -- averaging 8,000 calls a month
     -- from all 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.


INVESTING IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING:

    Largest Investment in Education in 30 Years. Maintaining his longtime commitment
     to education, the President enacted the largest investment in education in 30 years -- and
     the largest investment in higher education since the G.!. Bill -- by signing the 1997
     Balanced Budget Act.
    Providing Early Education to More than 830,000 Children with Head Start.
     200,000 more children are enrolled in Head Start today than in 1992.
    Promoting National Service and educational opportunities through AmeriCorps.
    Teaching Every Child to Read by the 3rd Grade. The America Reads Initiative will
     provide tutors after school, improve teaching, and help parents help their children learn to
     read.
     Striving for Excellence with National Education Standards. Seeking high national
     standards for all students, the President has proposed a first-ever national test in 4th grade
     reading and 8th grade math.
    Expanding Choice and Accountability in Public School. Supported increase of public
     charter schools, from only one charter school in the nation in 1993 to more than 1,000
     charter schools this year.
    Fighting for Critical Education Investments. The President has called on Congress to
     pass critical education priorities included in his FY99 Budget that include initiatives to
     recruit quality teachers, rebuild crumbling schools and reduce class size.
     Fought for passage of education tax breaks to promote lifelong learning.
     Representing the largest single increase in higher education since the G.I. Bill, the
     Balanced Budget includes a $1,500 Hope Scholarship to make the first two years of
     college universally available, and a 20-percent tuition tax credit for college juniors,
     seniors, graduate students, and working Americans pursuing lifelong learning.


CARING FOR OUR CHILDREN:

   Imposed Strict Measures to Keep Cigarettes out of the Hands of Our Children by
    restricting youth-targeted advertising; and the FDA made 18 the minimum age to
    purchase tobacco products nationwide, requiring photo I.D.s for anyone under the age of
    27. Fighting to enact comprehensive tobacco legislation.
   Took Steps to Ensure Children Have Safe Medications. Unveiled an FDA regulation
    that protects children by requiring manufacturers to study appropriate dosage levels of


                                                              Automated Records Management System
   Held First-Ever White House Conference on Child Care and White House
    Conference on Early Child Development and Learning. In April 1997, the President
    and First Lady held the White House Conference on Early Child Development and
    Learning to highlight the benefits of early nurturing by parents. And in October 1997, the
    White House Conference on Child Care began a dialogue on the child care challenges
    facing parents today -- availability, affordability, and assuring safety and quality.
   Proposed the Largest Single Investment in Child Care in the Nation's History.
    Between FY93 and FY97, federal funding for child care increased by nearly 79 percent,
    providing child care services for over one million children. The President's new $20
    billion child care proposal will double the number of children receiving child care
    subsidies to more than two million and increases tax credits for three million working
    families to help them pay for child care.
   Extended Health Care to Millions of Ch.i1dren with the Children's Health Initiative,
    the single largest investment in Health Care for children since 1965. The President fought
    to ensure that the Balanced Budget included $24 billion to provide meaningful health care
    coverage to millions of uninsured children.
   Fought for and Won $500 Child Tax Credit for 27 Million Families with 45 Million
    Children under Age 17. Thirteen million children from families with income below
    $30,000 will receive the child tax credit as a result ofthe President's efforts.
   Signed Landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. This law will help thousands of
    children waiting in foster care move more quickly into safe and permanent homes.
   Signed the Comprehensive Childhood Immunization Initiative. Thanks to President
    Clinton, immunization rates among two-year-olds have reached historic highs.
   Launched New Strategies to Reduce the High Rate of Teen Pregnancies. Teen (aged
    15 to 19 years) births have fallen six years in a row, by 12 percent from 1991 to 1996.


IMPROVING OUR NATION'S HEALTH:

   Protected and Strengthened Medicare Benefiting the 22 Million American Women
    Enrolled in Medicare. The Balanced Budget Act extended the life of the Medicare Trust
    Fund until at least 2010; expanded choices in health plans; and provided beneficiaries
    new preventive benefits, including more affordable annual mammograms for all
    beneficiaries, cervical cancer screening, and tests to help detect osteoporosis. The
    President has also put forth a new proposal that will help older women. The new options
    will help Americans ages 55 to 65 to access health insurance, including buying into
    Medicare.
   Increased Funding for Breast Cancer Research. Since the President took office,
    funding for breast cancer research, prevention and treatment has nearly doubled, from
    about $276 million in FY 1993 to $513 million in the President's FY 1998 budget.
    Implemented the Mammography Quality Standards Act to ensure the quality of
    mammograms; women can find a certified mammography facility by calling 1-800-4-
    CANCER.
   Providing Greater Control and Protection with the Patients' Bill of Rights. The
    President is calling on Congress to passe Federally enforceable consumer health care
    protections that include: guaranteed access to needed health care specialists including
    direct access to an OB-GYN; access to emergency room services when and where the
    need arises; continuity of care protections to ensure that patients' care will not abruptly
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
     appeals process for consumers to resolve their differences with their health plans; a limit
     on financial incentives to doctors to limit care and assurances that doctors and patients
     can openly discuss treatment options. Women are particularly vulnerable without these
     health care protections because they are greater users of health care services, they make
     three-quarters of the health care decisions for their families, and they have specific health
     care needs that are directly addressed by a patients' bill of rights.
    Preventing Discrimination Based on Genetic Information Both by Health Plans and
     Employers. Urging Congress to pass bipartisan legislation to prohibit health plans
     from inappropriately using genetic screening information to deny coverage, set
     premiums, or to distribute confidential information. The President also has
     supported legislation that ensures that employers do not use genetic information to
     discriminate against employees.
    Fought for Greater Health Security for America's Families. The President signed
     into law the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act which helps millions of
     Americans who move from one job to another, who are self-employed, or who have
     pre-existing medical conditions keep their health insurance.
    Endorsed Legislation That Would Ban Drive-thru Mastectomies, allowing women to
     stay in the hospital at least 48 hours following a mastectomy.
    Ended Drive-Thru Deliveries. Proposed and signed into law legislation requiring
     insurers to cover at least 48 hours of a post-natal hospital stay (72 hours for a Cesarean).


PROMOTING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES FOR WOMEN:

    Reversed the "Gag Rule" limiting the information federally funded family planning
    clinics could give to women.
    Increased Funding for Title X. The President's FY99 proposal will increase Title X
    Family Planning grants by $15 million -- a 46 percent increase since FY92.
    Signed the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, establishing a safety-zone
    around women's health clinics.


GENERATING MORE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN:

   Women Are Starting Businesses at Twice the Rate of All Businesses. Women own
    nearly 40 percent of all firms in the U.S. These eight million women-owned firms
    employ 18.5 million -one in every five U.S. workers - and contribute $2.3 trillion to
    the economy. The Small Business Administration's Office of Women's Business
    Ownership is working to foster this growth.
   Tripled the Number of Small Business Loans to Women Entrepreneurs. Between
    1993 and 1997 the SBA approved nearly 50,000 loans to women entrepreneurs under the
    7(a) and 504 loan programs. Last year alone, the Small Business Administration granted
    more than 10,000 loans, worth $1.67 billion, to women small business owners, triple the
    number of loans granted in 1992.


WOMEN AS PARTNERS IN DECISION MAKING:

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
    appointees are women.
   Women Hold 29 Percent of the Top Positions -- 29 percent of the positions requiring
    Senate confirmation (PAS) are held by women. Additionally,
    ~       34 percent of the presidential appointments, including boards and commissions,
            are held by women.
    ~       39 percent of non-career Senior Executive Service positions are held by women.
    ~       58 percent of Schedule C positions are held by women.
   Appointed the First Women Ever to Serve as Attorney General, Janet Reno, and
    Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright. Including the Attorney General and Secretary
    of State, women make up 27 percent of the Clinton Cabinet: Alexis Herman, Secretary of
    Labor; Donna Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services; Carol Browner,
    Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; Janet Yellen, Chair of the
    Council of Economic Advisors; and Charlene Barchevsky, United States Trade
    Representative.
   30 Percent of All of the President's JUdicial Nominees Are Women.
   Nominated the Second Woman to Serve on the Supreme Court. During his first year
    in office, President Clinton nominated Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the United States Supreme
    Court. Justice Ginsburg is only the second woman to serve on the nation's highest court.




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
