   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

   CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP        OPD ) )

   CREATION DATE/TIME:20-FEB-1999 14:45:50.00

   SUBJECT:   Draft council reponse to NAS report

   TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)        )
   READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  please print
  ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/20/99 02:47
  PM ---------------------------




  Thomas L. Freedman
  02/20/99 02:27:15 PM
  Record Type:    Record

  To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP, Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP
  cc:      Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
  Subject:         Draft council reponse to NAS report

  Attached are the draft executive summary and full response to the NAS
  report. On the crucial question of single food agency the executive
  summary reads:   "The Council supports the goal of NAS recommendation IlIa
     Here, the NAS calls for a new statute that establishes a unified
  framework for food safety programs with a single official with control
  over all federal food safety resources.  The report acknowledges that
  there may be many organizational approaches to achieving the goal of a
  D&single voiceD8 for federal food safety activities.  As recommended by
  the NAS, the Council will conduct an assessment of structural models that
  would strengthen the federal food safety system through better
  coordination, planning, and resource allocation."

  You should meet with Neal Lane this week to agree on strategy for next
  steps. Also, I am sending you a draft plan for moving responsibilities
  around and where the relevant players would stand on it.



  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
  ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

  TEXT:
  Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47)MAIL40873255Q.036 to ASCII,
   The following is a HEX DUMP:

  FF57504356050000010A020100000002050000003C20000000020000FC64EF2AD7E57FAA8E4F76
  8F20864531358924B40ADA4A01592C2FB90A428F8E2B56ED2AFA7FF610ADE9BAA94D30C805E043
  03DOB652146E0691AFBA1E1B6F8F25694982480A8A7FDF569645DF9CC6BA032E53A9B593AACAOB
  62DCC9EF8B717C99B88B23031D241CE4191AED3B35B4B765E8BAOE64EA49835BD440754210AD4A
  A9AD94E288045718DB41FA5279F450EF9FBEFF75408607766A90002DBE56C960E6372992702DEE
  231F3E6ECDD05B93E8233860E3COB4DBF94AEAD530417AEAA5FOBF8833F8CB4A25B18D8A342557
  AACE7FD068763FFA6D89C374DC3AAE2A4EBOFOC9BDDFC013FBAD6BE32AA3D10E2B5F034455085D
  FFFCC85 5F3BDD8210E452 9,lB1C7CC7BEB44CAD3 3 3D63 C4E66544 OAEC2DBO 2D6ABD6BF4 90BODCFA
  8EACA13E9264DF373FC2966D36968308224D805F727AE5660B98B75381F4F8D6099068CF63FDD9
  65D4569D254EAD8FCFB916DOF4367606B5CBF43A20AF7FB4E224541F798A94720B5185F926327F
  ABA7C8DAB13C07104562F37A87333AC2662DB5CBC2C39D6C5316C544F54DOC9A50F4B99FOC9E4D
                           Assessment of the NAS Report
                 Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption

   Americans have one of the world's safest food supplies. This is largely a result of sustained
   education and research efforts along the farm to table continuum as well as surveillance and
   regulatory programs. The federal food safety system is comprised of 12 agencies, is
   authorized by a diverse set of statutes, and is supported by numerous key partnerships with
   state, local, and tribal governments. Together these agencies have created a system that has
   given U.S. consumers confidence in the safety of their food purchases.

   As good as the nation's food safety system is, it must improved. Illnesses and deaths due to
   contaminated food continue to cause considerable human suffering and economic loss. That
   is why, at the very beginning of his first term, President Clinton set a course to strengthen the
   nation's food safety system. Under the President's leadership, surveillance and research have
   dramatically increased, programs are better coordinated, and regulations are more science-
   based. But this is only the beginning. The Council on Food Safety, with the help of the
   public, will continue to identify problems and promote solutions.

   The Council welcomes the input provided by the National Academy of Sciences in its August
   1998 report Ensuring Safe Food From Production to Consumption. This report lays out a
   clear rationale for a national food safety plan, one that is based on science and risk.

        The Council supports NAS recommendation I, which states that the food safety system
should be based on science. In this assessment of the NAS report, the Council provides
numerous examples of where this is already the case and examples of areas that need to be
strengthened.

       The Council supports NAS recommendation IIa, which calls for federal statutes to be
based on scientifically supportable assessments of risk to public health. In this regard, the
Council will conduct a thorough review of existing statutes and determine what can be
accomplished with existing regulatory flexibility and what improvements will require statutory
changes.

       The Council supports NAS recommendation lIb, which calls for the production of a
comprehensive national food safety plan. In fact, the development of such a plan is already well
underway and one of the primary functions of the Council as specified in Executive Order 13100.
 A key component of the plan will be a comparative risk assessment of the nation's food supply.

       The Council supports the goal of NAS recommendation IlIa. Here, the NAS calls for a
new statute that establishes a unified framework for food safety programs with a single official
with control over all federal food safety resources. The report acknowledges that there may be
many organizational approaches to achieving the goal of a "single voice" for federal food safety



                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
models that would strengthen the federal food safety system through better coordination,
planning, and resource allocation.

        The Council supports NAS recommendation IIIb. This recommendation argues that
agencies should have the legal partnering tools needed to unify their efforts with state and local
governments. Fortunately, federal food safety agencies already have many of the tools identified
by the NAS and have used them to establish extensive partnerships with state, tribal, and local
governments. However, some tools are missing and much more needs to be done to better
coordinate the federal government's interactions with other levels of government. As part of the
Council's strategic plan, the National Integrated Food Safety System project will identify barriers
to effective partnering and recommend ways to overcome them.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex.Dump Conversion
       Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption


At the request of Congress, the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) conducted a
study of the current food safety system to: (1) determine the scientific basis of an
effective food safety system; (2) assess the effectiveness ofthe current system; (3)
identify scientific and organizational needs and gaps at the federal level; and (4)
provide recommendations on scientific and organizational changes needed to ensure
an effective food safety system. To conduct this study, the NAS established a
committee and obtained input from federal agencies and other stakeholders of the
federal food safety system. The NAS issued its report on August 20, 1998.


On August 25, 1998, through Executive Order 13100, the President established the
Council and charged it to develop a comprehensive strategic plan for federal food
safety activities and to make recommendations to the President on how to implement
the plan. Also on August 25, 1998, the President issued a directive tasking the
Council to provide him with an assessment of the NAS report in 180 days.
Specifically, the President directed:


   " ... the Council to review and respond to this report as one of its first orders of
   business. After providing opportunity for public comment, including public
   meetings, the Council shall report back to me within 180 days with its views on
   the NAS=s recommendations. In developing its report, the Council should take
    into account the comprehensive strategic federal food safety plan that it will be
   developing. "


In response to the President's directive, the Council established a task force
consisting of representatives from the following departments and agencies: OSTP,
HHS, USDA, EPA, OMB, and DOC. The task force benefited from valuable input
obtained at four public meetings (Arlington, V A; Sacramento, CA; Chicago, IL; and
Dallas, TX) and from public comment dockets maintained by EPA, FSIS, and FDA.



                                          1                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
to improve the effectiveness of the federal food safety system through strengthening
science and risk assessment, strategic planning, and better federal integration with
state and local governments. In particular, the NAS places appropriate weight
throughout its report on applying science to the management of government food
safety efforts. The Council believes that science based food safety surveillance and
inspection are very important elements of the nation's food safety system.


The NAS report also recommends that the nation's food safety system should be
based on risk. The Council agrees with the report's thesis that a food safety system
that includes regulation, research and development, education, inspection and
enforcement, and surveillance should be based on science and should use various risk
analyses including quantitative and qualitative risk assessments and risk management
principles to achieve such a system.


The Council recognizes that a food safety system comprised of 12 agencies with
differing missions and statutory authority may increase the potential for uneven
adoption and inconsistent application of regulatory philosophies based on science.
However, the Council believes that through implementation of its strategic plan
(including its assessment of existing statutes and structure) the potential for uneven
adoption and inconsistent application among federal agencies will be reduced. The
Council is committed to identifying further improvements that would result in a
seamless science-based food safety system.


                                Recommendation I


                       Base the food safety system on science.


The NAS report notes that the United States has enjoyed notable successes in
improving food safety and that with increasing knowledge, many rational, science-
based regulatory philosophies have been adopted. The report suggests, however, that


                                         2                     Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
given the fragmentation of food safety activities, and the differing missions of the
various agencies responsible for specific components of food safety. The greatest
strides in ensuring food safety from production to consumption, the NAS argued, can
be made through a scientific, risk-based system that ensures surveillance, regulatory,
research, educational resources are allocated to maximize effectiveness.


Council Assessment


The Council strongly endorses this recommendation. Many federal food safety
programs are already, or are being modified to be science-based.      The Council
recognizes that scientifically robust programs will result in better identification of
public health needs, determination of the most effective means of reducing public
health risk including the most cost-effective opportunities for improvement, and
priority setting.


The scientific information generated through surveillance, research, and risk'
assessment efforts will result in improved food safety only ifthere is a commensurate
strong effort to translate that scientific information into practical, usable information
at the working level, e.g., through guidance or education. This means there must be
education for all those involved in producing, manufacturing, transporting, and
preparing food as well as for those persons involved in government food safety
regulatory activities.


The Council's goal is to ensure that science and risk based decision-making are
central to the Administration's on-going efforts and its strategic plan. Fortunately,
considerable improvements have been made over the past several years. The strong
scientific underpinnings of the President's Food Safety Initiative, enactment of the
Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA), restructuring of food safety agencies within
USDA, and many individual agency activities, such as implementation ofHACCP




                                          3
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
of the food safety system.


The Council believes that the necessary elements of a science-based program-
surveillance, outbreak response, risk assessment, research, inspection, and education
of stakeholders-are largely in place, and that improvements planned for the next 5-
10 years will enhance food safety. Specifically, the Council will consider in its
strategic plan the following elements of a science-based food safety system: .


   Surveillance. Food safety agencies will continue to develop more effective ways
    to achieve surveillance goals and to monitor the safety of the food supply.
    Although FoodNet (foodborne outbreak monitoring system), PulseNet (foodbome
    pathogen DNA fingerprinting system), and the National Antibiotic Resistance
    Monitoring System (NARMS) provide information never before available in the
    United States on foodborne illnesses and the occurrence of antibiotic resistant
    pathogens, enhanced quantitative data on the entire range of infectious and non-
    infectious foodborne hazards will require additional efforts.
   Risk assessment. Risk assessment is a valuable tool for setting priorities,
    allocation of resources, and regulatory decision-making. The development of a
    comparative risk assessment for hazards in the food supply will be an important
    aspect of both strategic planning and budgeting. As currently done for chemical
    hazards such as pesticide residues, the federal government needs to create and use
    a national microbial risk assessment capability as a means of identifying hazards
    and quantifying risk and assist in creating similar capacities internationally. EPA
    will use risk assessment to determine acceptable levels of pesticides residues.
    Under FQP A, this approach has been strengthened to further protect all
    consumers, and especially children, from the risks of pesticides in their diet.
   Research. Through the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research, a research
    infrastructure has been established to improve and coordinate food safety research
    activities across the federal government. The Institute will continue a critical
    review ofthe federally supported food safety research that was begun through the



                                          4
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    1-lex-Dump Conversion
    include: coordination of research planning, budget development, and
    prioritization; scientific support of food safety guidance, policy, and regulation;
    enhanced communication and links among federal agencies; and enhanced
    communication and links with industry and academic partners through use of
    pUblic-private partnerships and technology transfer mechanisms.
   Education. Food safety agencies will expand science-based education and
    training programs for producers, processors, distributors, food service workers,
    and consumers as well as those involved in regulatory activities. It is essential to
    include in these programs new scientific information on foodborne hazards and
    their control and effective food safety management strategies.
   Inspection/Preventive Controls. USDA and FDA will further improve and
    evaluate the effectiveness of inspections of domestically and internationally
    produced food and will continue to develop and implement science-based
    preventive controls such as RACCP systems and the Good Agricultural Practices.
    Where necessary, regulatory requirements will be established, such as additional
    performance standards for pathogen reduction that can be developed as more
    monitoring and surveillance data become available.
   Consistency of Science-Based Standards. USDA, FDA, and EPA will work
    toward clear food safety standards nationally and internationally. The Conference
    for Food Production brings together all 50 states for purposes of regulating retail
    establishments, and the Food Code is gaining wider adoption among the states.
    Internationally, the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) is the primary
    mechanism through which these activities will take place. U.S. food safety
    agencies should also become more active in providing technical톋ssistance to
    developing countries.
   Private Sector Incentives. The federal and state regulatory agencies will work
    with the private sector to develop new technologies to further food safety and to
    encourage commercial scale-up applicable in large and small companies, and
    industry adoption. A research effort with industry, consumer, academic, and .
    government participation could develop new technologies and evaluate them.


                                         5
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
    continues to be critical. For example, Salmonella data from the first year of
    HACCP implementation in poultry facilities show a trend toward fewer
    contaminated products. Also, by providing important information on trends in the
    incidence of infections with foodbome pathogens, FoodNet assists in the
    evaluation of the effect of preventive controls. The effect of preventive controls
    implemented by the dairy industry on the reduction in the number of cases of
    listeriosis was readily apparent in a CDC-conducted case-control study that was a
    forerunner of FoodNet.



Scientific Challenges

The Council faces a number of challenges in improving the scientific basis of the
food safety system. A general challenge is that while food safety agencies must be
guided primarily by science, the agencies must also consider other factors such as
technical limitations, statutory mandates, policy considerations, budget constraints,
practicality, and consumer assurances and societal preferences. Science must be
advanced within the context of these competing interests. The following are a few
examples of actions that would strengthen the scientific underpinnings of federal food
safety efforts:


   Emerging new pathogens, changing food habits, a global food supply, and a
    changing population require new data that are difficult to predict and obtain in a
    timely way. An example is the impact of E. coli 0157:H7, which was unknown
    as a foodbome pathogen 20 years ago, but has been responsible for major
    outbreaks of foodbome illness in recent years.
   Gaps exist in our knowledge of microbial pathogens and in our ability to measure
    their impact on human health. For example, there are gaps in knowledge about
    the pathogens associated with fresh fruits and vegetables and the routes of
    contamination.




                                         6
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
    challenge.   Implementation of the new FQP A standards for pesticide residues
    requires EPA to assess aggregate risk from food, water, and residential exposure
    as well as cumulative risk from multiple pesticides.
   Gaps exist in our knowledge of monitoring and detection of food contaminants.
    For example, our current knowledge is insufficient to detect and monitor the
    presence of non-indigenous pathogens or unapproved pesticides on food.
   Gaps exist in our knowledge of effective interventions, prevention, and
    alternatives that minimize contamination of food. For example, the existing level
    of knowledge is insufficient to develop on-fann preventive controls and systems
    of testing. With the advent ofFQPA, more research is also needed to develop
    safer pesticide alternatives or crop production techniques in order to ease the
    transition from older pest control techniques to newer, safer ones.
   Insufficient data exist on the entire range of infectious and non-infectious
    foodborne hazards. Even with the improvements made through FoodNet and
    PulseNet, enhancement of quantitative data on the entire range of infectious and
    non-infectious foodborne hazards will strengthen monitoring and surveillance
    programs for prevention, early identification, and prediction of emerging food
    safety problems.

                        Examples of Recent Changes that Strengthen the
                          Federal Food Safety System Scientific Base

                       USDA 1994 reorganization (separated public health
                        from marketing functions)
                       HACCP implementation (12/97 seafood and 1/98 meat
                        and poultry)
                       FQP A enactment and implementation
                       FoodNetlPulseNet established
                       FDA Fresh Produce Guidelines released
                       Joint Institute for Food Safety Research created
                       Research funding increased
                       Food Safety Research Database initiated
                       Annual Food Safety Research Conference held
                       Interagency Risk Assessment Consortium established
                       Risk Assessment Clearinghouse established


                                         7
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

  Congress should change federal statutes so that inspection, enforcement, and
research efforts can be based on scientifically supportable assessments of risks to
                                  public health.

The report identifies a need for a "national food law that is clear, rational, and
comprehensive, as well as scientifically based on risk" as a major component of a
model food safety system. The report concludes it is necessary to revise the current
statutes on food safety to create a comprehensive national food law under which:


    Inspection, enforcement, and research efforts can be based 'on a scientifically
     supportable assessment of risks to public health. This means eliminating the                     o

    . continuous inspection system for meat and poultry and replacing it with a science-
     based approach that is capable of detecting hazards of concern.
    There is a single set of flexible science-based regulations for all foods that allows
     resources to be assigned based on risk, that permits coordination of federal and
     state resources, and that makes it possible to address all risks from farm to table.
    All imported foods come only from countries with food safety standards
     equivalent to U.S. standards.


The NAS report states that the lawsXparticularly what the report characterizes as the
requirement that there be continuous inspection of meat and poultry production
through sight, smell, and touch (Aorganoleptic=:) inspectionXcreate inefficiencies, do
not allow resource use to reflect the risks involved, and inhibit the use of scientific
decision-making in activities related to food safety, including the monitoring of
imported food.




                                           8
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                pcx.Dump Conversion


The report's recommendation that federal statutes provide agencies with authority to
make decisions based on scientific assessments of risks to the public health is sound.
Decisions based on public health risk assessments allow agencies to make effective
                                                                   ,
use of science to set food safety priorities, allocate resources to higher risk areas, and
instill consumer confidence that high-risk hazards are being addressed.


Since the federal food safety regulatory agencies operate under very different
legislative authorities, the Council will conduct a full assessment of these statutes and
evaluate the degree of regulatory flexibility that already exists. Therefore, the
Council recommends that a legislative review be undertaken as part of the strategic
planning process. The purpose of the review would be to: 1) examine the similarities
and differences in federal food safety statutes; 2) identify the "best" statutory
approaches for reducing foodbome illness; and 3) assess both gaps and statutory
barriers to implementation of the plan. The need for statutory changes could then be
detennined, and, if necessary, legislative principles developed which would fonn the
basis for discussions with stakeholders and Congress. For example, given the recent
overhaul of pesticide legislation, the Council believes that further statutory changes
may not be needed for pesticides at this time.


In some cases, the NAS report overstates the problem with existing statutory
requirements. For example, the report concludes that the statutes require the current
method of organoleptic inspection of all carcasses. Even though the current law
requires continuous inspection, it does not specify how this inspection mandate is to
be carried out. The statutes do require appropriate examination of animals prior to
slaughter and examination post-slaughter at all official slaughter and processing
facilities. This continuous inspection requirement for animals is important to ensure
use of the best sanitary dressing processes, prevention of fecal contamination (which
harbors the pathogens that cause disease), reduction in the incidence of disease-
causing pathogens, and prevention of meat from diseased animals from entering the



                                          9
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
from diseases and other hazards to human health. Europe's experience with Bovine
Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) should serve as a reminder that wholesale
elimination of inspection of all animals and carcasses is not the most prudent course
of action.


USDA has the flexibility to create, and in fact has begun to develop and test, a more
risk based inspection system by adopting regulations requiring that HACCP be
implemented in all slaughter and processing plants. USDA is also studying how best
to effect further inspection improvements in the future.


The food safety agencies have achieved and can continue to accomplish significant
science-based improvements in their food safety programs under current authorities.
However, new authorities that would improve the federal food safety system have
been proposed by the President and are waiting action by Congress or have been
identified and are in need of Executive branch clearance before a formal legislative
proposal can be advanced for congressional consideration. Further analysis of the
statutes may result in additional proposed statutory modifications.


Current Legislative Challenges


Congress should pass:


   the Food Safety Enforcement Enhancement Act, forwarded by the Clinton
    Administration and introduced during the last Congress that increases the
    enforcement capabilities of USDA; and
   legislation that gives FDA increased authority to effectively assure the safety of
    food imports.




                                         10
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
between agencies or where resources could be more effectively shared between
agencies. Examples include:


     developing a legislative proposal to improve the current system for the regulation
      of eggs and egg products;
     modifying statutes to permit FSIS inspectors not only to report their findings to
     FDA but actually to perform inspections and enforcement for that agency to
      increase interagency efficiencies; and
    developing a legislative proposal giving FSIS explicit authority to enter into
     .cooperative agreements for food safety risk assessment.

                   Recent Advances in Applying Scientific Assessments
                          Of Public Health Risks to Food Safety

                      RACCP implemented
                      FQP A tolerance reassessment based on aggregate
                       exposure, cumulative risk, and vulnerable
                       subpopulations.
                      Single, risk-based pesticide standard for food
                       established
                      Tolerance setting focusing on the riskiest pesticides
                      Priority registration given to "safer" pesticides
                      Risk Assessment Consortium established
                      FoodNet/PulseNet established
                      Good Agricultural Practices guidance for fresh
                       produce established
                      Unpasteurized juice warning labels required




                                  Recommendation lIb

         Congress and the Administration should require development of a
    comprehensive national food safety plan. Funds appropriated for food safety
    programs (including research and education programs) should be allocated in
       accordance with science-based assessments of risk and potential benefit.




                                           11                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
and the Administration require preparation of a comprehensive, national food safety
plan. The NAS report lists several essential features of such a plan, including a
unified food safety mission; integrated federal, state and local activities; adequate
support for research and surveillance; and increased efforts to ensure the s'afetyof
imported foods. The second part of the recommendation stresses that resources
should be allocated on the basis of science-based assessments of risk and potential
benefits.


Council Assessment


The Council agrees that a comprehensive national food safety strategic plan should be
developed and the development of such a plan is underway. In fact, the President's
Food Safety Initiative was an initial step toward a national food safety plan. The
1997 Farm to Table report was a means of leveraging federal food safety resources
through coordinated planning and cooperative work to meet common needs such as
development of surveillance data, response to outbreaks, research into preventive
interventions, development of risk assessment techniques particularly for microbial
risk assessments, and consumer education. This initial plan also took some steps
toward extending food safety planning to the state and local level.


Strategic Planning


Picking up where Farm to Table report left off, the Council will continue and expand
the strategic planning process. One of the Council's primary purposes is to develop a
comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities that contains specific
recommendations on needed changes, including goals with measurable outcomes.
The plan's principal goal is to enhance the safety of the nation's food supply and
protect public health through a seamless   science~   and risk-based food safety system.
The plan will set priorities, improve coordination and efficiency, identify gaps in the




                                           12

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
prevention strategies, and develop performance measures to show progress.


Preparation of the food safety strategic plan will be a public process, and will
consider both short- and long-term issues including new and emerging threats and the
special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the elderly. Once the
plan is sufficiently complete, the Council will advise agencies of priorities for
investing in food safety and ensure that federal agencies annually submit coordinated
food safety budgets to OMB to sustain and strengthen existing capacities. In short,
the President's Council on Food Safety will develop a national food safety plan and
make budget recommendations to accomplish what the NAS report recommends.


The Council has defined the scope of future federal level food safety strategic
planning and a process for interagency planning and public participation. An
interagency task force anticipates having a draft plan ready for public review and
discussion in January 2000. Even while developing this plan, the task force intends to
continue its consultations with stakeholders. The following is the draft vision
statement for the Council's strategic plan:


    "Consumers can be confident that food is safe, healthy, and affordable. We work
    within a seamless food safety system that uses farm-to-table preventive strategies
    and integrated research, surveilhince, inspection, and enforcement. Weare
    vigilant to new and emergent threats and consider the needs of vulnerable
    subpopulations. We use science- and risk-based approaches along with
    public/private partnerships. Food is safe because everyone understands and
    accepts their responsibilities."


The President's Council on Food Safety held four public meetings in the Fall of 1998
in Arlington, V A; Sacramento, CA; Chicago, IL; and Dallas, TX to solicit comments
on this draft vision for food safety and to identify a strategic planning process, goals
and critical steps as well as potential barriers to achieving that vision.



                                           13
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
public meetings and the input received through the notice and comment process to
determine the major themes, issues, and subject areas. The task force will also
consider the conclusions and recommendations of the NAS report, input from the
federal, state, and local government National Integrated Food Safety System project,
and input from the agencies involved. The task force will then develop a proposed set
of strategic goals and objectives and present a draft plan to the President's Council on
Food Safety. Following Council review, the draft plan will be provided to the public
for formal review and comment. After public comment, the task force will prepare a
final plan with specific recommendations on needed changes and steps to achieve a
seamless food safety system including resource needs, roles, and barriers to
implementation, and submit this final plan to the Council for approval.


The planning process will build upon common ground and provide the forum to
tackle some of the difficult public health, resource, and management questions facing
the federal food safety agencies and our state, tribal and local government partners.
The plan will identify areas for enhanced coordination and efficiencies, determine
whether legislative changes would be beneficial, and clarify federal, state, and local
government roles and responsibilities in the national food safety system (see
discussion under recommendation I1Ib).


Allocation of Resources


The NAS report recommendation goes a step further than a national plan by urging
that resources be allocated according to science-based assessments of risk and
potential benefits. As stipulated in Executive Order 13100, the Council will develop
annual budget recommendations consistent with the strategic plan. The Council will
develop guidance for food safety agencies to consider during the preparation of their
individual budgets. The Council has created a budget task force that will:




                                         14
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
    plans and Council budget guidance on priority areas for investment to identify
    budget data and other information that will be necessary to plan and coordinate
    agency budget submissions to OMB;
   design a uniform format for presenting food safety initiative budget components
    in the OMB budget process for use in both individual agencies and the unified
    budget submissions;
   develop necessary guidance to facilitate submission of a unified food safety
    initiative budget and any other food safety issues deemed appropriate by the
    Council;
   establish a timetable for developing coordinated food safety budget requests and
    for submitting information to the Council that accommodates the various
    agencies' budget planning processes; and
   consider the issue of whether to amend OMB Circular No. A-II (OMB guidance
    to agencies on budget structure and reporting elements) to include food safety as a
    budget cross-cut.


Comparative Risk Assessment


An important part to both risk-based planning and resource allocation will be the
development of a comprehensive comparative risk assessment of the food supply.
The Council has requested the Interagency Food Safety Risk Assessment Consortium,
which consists of EPA, FDA, CDC, and USDA, to consider how to develop a
comparative risk analysis for food safety strategic planning.


The Council believes that various steps may need to be taken to evaluate risks
including: a ranking of foodbome pathogen risks based on CDC surveillance and
economic data; consideration of a broader range of food safety hazards including not
only microbial risks, but also pesticides and chemicals; and finally selection of highly
ranked hazards, an evaluation of control measures, and an evaluation of net benefits.
The Council must avoid applying risk assessment that is too strict, rigorous, or


                                         15
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump 텰onversion
at the current time, with the understanding that scientific risk estimates can, and will
likely, change frequently over time.


Challenges in Planning


The Council faces the following challenges in developing a comprehensive food
safety strategic plan and allocating resources based on risk:


   Developing and successfully implementing a national plan will require strong
    cooperation, coordination, and communication, since each federal, state, and local
    agency has unique mandates, authorities, history, culture, and operating
    procedures.
   The diversity of stakeholders in food safety is enormous. It will be difficult, but
    imperative, that all stakeholders are represented in the Council's planning process.



                                  Progress in Strategic Planning

                        President's 1997 Farm to Table Food Safety Initiative
                        President's Fresh Produce and Imported Food Safety
                         Initiative
                        Establishment of the Joint Institute for Food Safety
                         Research
                        Establishment of the President's Council
                        Input from the National Academy of Sciences, Council
                         of Agricultural Science and Technology, and other
                         organizations
                        National Integrated Food Safety System project
                         meetings
                        Input from multiple public meetings




                            Recommendation IlIa



                                         16                                      Monooement System
                                                                Automated Records .... ....,
                                                                Hex.Dump Conversion
 unified and central framework for managing federal food safety programs, one
that is headed by a single official and which has the responsibility and control of
 resources for all federal food safety activities, including outbreak management,
     standard-setting, inspection, monitoring, surveillance, risk assessment,
                       enforcement, research, and education.


The NAS report finds that the CutTent regulatory   s~ructure   for food safety in the
United States is not well equipped to meet current challenges. Specifically, it points
out that the system is facing tremendous pressures with regard to:


   emerging pathogens and ability to detect them;
   maintaining adequate inspection and monitoring of the increasing volume of
    imported foods, especially fruits and vegetables;
   maintaining adequate inspection of commercial food services and the increasing
    number of larger food processing plants; and
   the growing number of people at high risk for foodbome illnesses.


The report cites the strengths of the current food safety system, including the advent
of Food Net and PulseNet, HACCP implementation, and the Partnership for Food
Safety Education. It also identifies deficiencies, which it attributes partly to "the
fragmented nature of the system." The report attributes the fragmentation largely to a
lack of adequate integration among the various federal agencies involved in the
implementation ofthe primary statutes that regulate food safety, and observes that
this lack of adequate integration occurs also with state and local activities. The report
notes that 12 primary federal agencies are involved in key food safety functions and
references more than 50 memoranda of agreement between various agencies related
to food safety.


The NAS report attributes the lack of adequate integration among federal, state and
local food safety authorities in part to the absence of "focused leadership" that has
the responsibility, the authority and the resources to address key food safety




                                         17
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
to create a single federal voice for food safety. These include:


   a Food Safety Council with representatives from the agencies with a central chair
    appointed by the President, reporting to Congress and having control of resources;
   designating one current agency as the lead agency and having the head of that
    agency be the responsible individual;
   a single agency reporting to one current cabinet-level secretary; and
   an independent single agency at cabinet level.


Although the report indicates many ofthe NAS committee's members believe that a
single, unified agency headed by a single administrator is the most viable structure for
implementing the "single voice" concept, the report recognizes that there may be
many other models that would be workable.


Council Assessment

The Council agrees with the goal of the NAS recommendation--that there should be a
fully integrated food safety system in the U.S. The food safety agencies are
committed to this goal, and the Council is confident that its comprehensive strategic
plan will be a major step toward creating a seamless system. The Council will
conduct, through a public process, a thorough assessment of structural and
organizational options before recommending major legislative or administrative
actions on reorganization. The Council will identify and analyze existing models in
government for achieving mutual and truly national food safety goals. Some of these
models might address structure, and some might address facilitating mechanisms.


The Council's strategic plan will bring agreement on the vision, goals, and actions
needed to enhance the safety of the nation's food supply and protect public health by
reducing the annual incidence of acute and chronic foodbome illness. It will also




                                         18
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
 state, tribal, and local government partners.


 While the Council recognizes that certain models of reorganization may improve
 coordination and allow for a better allocation of resources, any reorganization of food
 safety activities must recognize the non-food-safety-related responsibilities of each
 agency and how these relate to the food safety responsibilities. Reorganization must
 not be done at the expense of these responsibilities and activities. The   Coun~il   is
 concerned that, ifnot done carefully, separating food safety from non-food safety
 activities in each agency could act to weaken consumer protection overall.


 The Council recognizes that expertise and knowledge, particularly expertise in state-
 of -the-art science and technology, provides a resource to food safety activities. For
. example, analytical methods for detection and quantification on economic adulterants
 in foods may be adapted to detection of chemical contaminants that threaten public
 health. Expertise in non-food safety regulatory science and legal procedures are
 critical when warnings are required on food labels to assure safety. In addition,
 reorganizations must avoid interfering with the public health framework established
 to identify and respond to infectious and non-infectious public health threats whether
they are foodborne or not. Thus, in its strategic planning the Council will be
cognizant of the interplay between the food safety and non-food safety activities of
each agency and how they strengthen each other.


The Council believes that there are programs that can benefit from immediate
reorganization. For example, during the last two years, FDA and NOAA have been
developing a proposal to transfer the NOAA Seafood Inspection Program to FDA as a
Performance Based Organization (PBO) in order to operate the voluntary Seafood
Inspection Program on a more business-like basis. The PBO would be formed under
the umbrella of FDA and would include all seafood inspection activities now carried
out by NOAA. The fiscal year 2000 budget proposes to transfer the existing Seafood
Inspection Program from NOAA to FDA. This action will fully consolidate federal



                                          19
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
effectiveness of seafood oversight. It will also enhance the overall safety and
wholesomeness of seafood products. Funds are provided to cover the costs of
transition, including training and education activities.




Factors to Consider in Organizational Restructuring


The Council assessment of structural and organizational options must take into
consideration the following factors:


   Many food safety issues can only be dealt with through collaboration and
    partnerships between agencies. For example, BSE is an animal health issue and a
    human health issue. Foodborne disease problems are also waterborne disease
    problems. Salmonella enteritidis in shell eggs is not only a food safety issue but
    also an animal health 'and a marketing issue.
   Research and education programs for food safety do not operate as separate
    activities within the agencies, but rather draw significant strength from one
    another. For example, any attempt at placing "pure" food safety research and
    education in one agency could actually jeopardize the ability to deliver improved
    food safety to consumers. While some projects are entirely focused on food
    safety, the food safety research portfolio includes many other projects in such
    areas as animal health and animal genetics. Similarly, scientific expertise and
    endeavors should always inform regulatory activities. Each regulatory agency
    must have a cadre of trained and involved scientists to facilitate communications
    and cooperation with the research/education agencies. Thus, any restructuring
    must ensure continued coordination and communication between food safety
    programs and non-food safety functions that strengthen these programs.
   The Council should build upon existing successful partnerships. For example,
    CSREES FSIS, FDA, CDC and other private and governmental organizations
    now participate in the Partnership for Food Safety Education. This group serves


                                         20
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
      agencies, and is a key element of the Food Safety Initiative. Yet this and other
      partnerships would not be possible without relying on the many effective working
      relationships developed among the participants over the years, including joint
      projects on residue control and nutrition labeling. Any reorganization needs to
      recognize the importance of existing partnerships.
     Food safety standards at the federal, state, local, and international levels need to
      be consistent. Mechanisms such as the Codex Alimentarius for international
      standards and the Conference for Food Protection for federal and state standards
      are in place to reduce inconsistency, but better integration at all levels is needed
      and viewed as a long-range project.



                            Recent Steps Taken to Create a Unified
                                 Federal Food Safety System

                      1997 President's Food Safety Initiative
                       implemented
                      JIFSAN/Interagency Risk Assessment Consortium
                       created
                      President's Fresh Produce plan implemented
                      FORC-G established
                      President's Council on Food Safety established
                      Restructuring of seafood inspection proposed
                      Partnership for Food Safety Education created



                                Recommendation IIIb
     Congress should provide the agency responsible for food safety at the federal
    level with the tools necessary to integrate and unify the efforts of authorities at
                     the state and local levels to enhance food safety.

The NAS report recommends that federal, state, and local governments function as an
integrated enterprise, along with their partners in the private sector. The report
identified five statutory tools required to integrate federal, state, and local food safety
activities into an effective national system:



                                            21
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
    processes;
   continued authority to deputize state and local officials to serve as enforcers of
    federal law;
   funding to support, in whole or in part, activities of state and local officials that
    are judged necessary or appropriate to enhance the safety of food;
   authority given to the Federal official responsible for food safety to direct action
    by other agencies with assessment and monitoring capabilities; and
   authority to convene working groups, create partnerships, and direct other forms
    and means of collaboration to achieve integrated protection of the food supply.


This recommendation acknowledges the "equally critical roles" of state and local
government entities with those of the federal government in ensuring food safety, and
suggests changes in federal authorizing and appropriating legislation may be
necessary to achieve better integration of federal, state, and local activities.


Council Assessment


The Council agrees that the roles of state, tribal, and local governments in the food
safety system are critical and supports steps taken toward the development of a more
fully integrated national food safety system. While more needs to be done to
optimize and develop new partnerships, the federal food safety agencies have already
established extensive interactions with state and local regulatory agencies. In fact, a
critical factor for the Council to consider is the manner in which existing federal/state
or local activities are integrated and coordinated. The Council believes that its
strategic planning process provides a fresh opportunity for their non-federal partners
to participate as primary and equal partners in the development of the future food
safety system.


Some overlap occurs between federal and state and local food safety efforts. Neither
federal food safety agencies nor state and local agencies have sufficient resources to


                                          22
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion



    carry out a comprehensive food safety program, but all these agencies have expertise
    and resources that, when combined in an integrated program, would significantly
    enhance the impact of food safety programs.


    The Council also agrees that the five statutory tools identified by the NAS are critical
    to ensuring good coordination between the federal government and state and local
    agencies. Fortunately, the federal food safety regulatory agencies (FDA, FSTS, and
    EPA) already have many of the statutory tools recommended by NAS.


    The Council recognizes and agrees with the report's conclusion that the lack of
    integration among federal, state, and local authorities often complicate the
    administration of regulatory programs.    We need to utilize available mechanisms to
    leverage resources and expertise from government, industry, academia, and
    consumers to expand the nation's food safety capabilities beyond what anyone group
    can accomplish. Increased awareness and knowledge of food safety in each segment
    of the food safety community reduces the need for extensive regulation of industry
    and decreases the incidence of contamination at every point in the food safety system
    in order to protect public health.


    Natiorial Integrated Food Safety System (NIFSS) Project


    HHS, USDA, and EPA are working with state and local officials in a National
    Integrated Food Safety System (NIFSS) project to identify the appropriate roles and
    to develop mutually supporting common goals for all levels of government in the
    U.S. food safety system. This work is considered integral to the Council's strategic
    plan and coordinated budget recommendations and will be the basis for improved
    integration with state, tribal and local governments.


    Under the leadership ofthe FDA, the current project is proceeding under existing
    federal, state, and local laws although all levels of government recognize that changes
    in some of the federal and state laws will be necessary to achieve an integrated



                                             23
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
health and agriculture agencies and state laboratories representing all 50 states, Puerto
Rico, and the District of Columbia, CDC and USDA in Kansas City in September
1998. In December 1998, six work groups and an 18 member Coordinating
Committee composed of federal, state and local officials met in Baltimore, Maryland
to begin to develop plans for implementing recommendations and overcoming the
obstacles identified at the Kansas City meeting. The next meeting is planned for late
winter or early spring, 1999. The group estimates that a fully integrated
federallstatellocal food safety system will take approximately 10 years to build. The
Association of Food and Drug Officials, which is an organization of state and local
public health officials and regulators, endorses the concept of a NIFSS.


Challenges to Developing a National Integrated Food Safety System


Even though there is some uniformity between federal and state standards (e.g.,
standards associated with the intrastate shipment of meat or poultry), the Council
recognizes the following challenges to building an integrated food safety system:


   Integrated federal, state, and local food safety systems will help build a more
    consistent, uniform level of safety assurance across the nation. To accomplish
    this, however, clear, national standards are needed, together with uniform food
    safety messages and enhanced training, capability, and technical assistance to
    meet all levels of regulatory, industry, academic, and consumer need.
   Consumers are concerned that the economic interests of industry within states
    may be a source of conflict if those states have an expanded food safety role that
    includes activities thought to be primarily a federal responsibility (e.g., firm
    inspections ).
   Industry is concerned that food safety regulation will be inconsistent among the
    states if systems are integrated without adequate preparation of the state agencies
    to step into the expanded food safety role.




                                          24
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


        In order for integration to work, it is crucial that state and local governments have
         access to high quality scientists and health care professionals. The strategic plan
         will explore incentives for education and training of epidemiologists, laboratory
         workers, public health nurses, and environmental sanitarians.


                               Examples of Federal/State/Local Cooperation
                      Milk Sanitation Program - Pasteurized Milk Ordinance
                      Retail Food Safety Program - Food Code
                      National, Integrated Food Safety System Project
                      Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Program
                      States conduct 5,000 inspections of FDA-regulated plants
                      FDA maintains more than 100 state partnerships
                      Conference for Food Protection
                      FoodNetiEmerging Infections Program
                      PulseNet
                      Epidemiology and Laboratory Cooperative Agreements
                      Appropriate delegation of pesticide responsibility to states
                      Partial funding of states for implementation of some pesticide
                       programs and for most compliance programs
                      State FIFRA Issues Research and Evaluation Group
                      State and local government involvement in FORC-G
                      State conducts inspections in 250 FSIS regulated plants
                      FSIS oversees and supports 26 state "equal to" meat and poultry
                       inspection programs
                      FSIS supports animal production food safety outreach projects
                       involving 11 states
                      FSIS supports animal production food safety workshops
                      HACCP based enhancement of state labs, computer capabilities,
                       and state training
                      Partnership for Food Safety Education "Fight BAC!" campaign




                                              25
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
