RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL                          (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP                OPD )   )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 09:44:04.00

SUBJECT:          Talking Points for Data Collection

TO: Jennifer M. Luray ( CN=Jennifer M. Luray/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/26/99 09:46
AM - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




Thomas L. Freedman
03/24/99 12:04:53 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:      Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP
Subject:         Talking Points for Data Collection

Here's what I'd say trying to convince advocates this is a worthy data
collection provision.

1.   Update.   I wanted to get back to you on where we were on putting
together a strong data collection piece for Daschle's bill.  We've been
talking a lot to EEOC, Labor, to get something that works and could get
passed. Actually, we've had these meetings with something like 17
agencies and offices, and we've had a lot of back and forth,   but I think
we've come up with something good.

2. Background.   Last year, you remember Daschle's bill originally had a
very general provision that allowed EEOC to collect data from employers
of more than 100 employees. But there was a strong sense that as written
the provision would draw really heavy fire from business groups, it would
go nowhere.

3. Our goal.    Our goal was to find some way to give EEOC the same
ability to coliect the data that Daschle had and mitigate the attacks
and I think we've done that.

4. The proposal. The idea I wanted to bounce off you does two things:
First, it tells EEOC to survey what data is available to the federal
government, what do we have now? And it says EEOC should identify the
gaps in our data collection for the purpose of better enforcement. And it
says EEOC should consult other agencies when it does this.

5.    Second,  it says EEOC should take that evaluation and run a process
and come up with a proposed rule for collecting the data necessary to
enforce the laws under its jurisdiction.   To fill the gaps.  The way we
neutralized the business concerns is that we just explicitly identify
factors that EEOC consider anyway in making its rule, and say EEOC will
consider them.  So we say that in figuring out the best way to enforce the
law, EEOC will consider the burden on business, and will consider what is
the best vehicle for collecting the data, and how it will target
businesses information to be most useful to EEOC and OFCCP.

5.    But at the end of the day, it is EEOC writing the rule to collect data
     for enforcement that is useful to EEOC.

     6.   EEOC/ Labor Support.  We've talked to Ida Castro and Ellen vargyas at
     EEOC who think this is a good step forward, and we've talked to Shirley
     Wilcher at OFCCP and she likes it as well.

     7.   Real Money and Deadlines. And we give an explicit up to $2 million
     authorization to do it, and a deadline of under 18 months    although Ida
     plans to try and do it in under a year.

     8.    Puts Administration on Record. Anyway, I think its a good package,
     it puts the Administration on the record for strong data collection by
     EEOC.

     9.   Neutralizes Republican Attack.  And it gives us an answer when
     Republicans say it is a massive overhaul of the EEO-l form, because we say
     no, we are going through a process to identify what we need -- maybe it
     will be EEO-l, maybe not,  but let's put figuring out what we need and
     enforcing the law as the prime goal.  This bill does that.  And it is
     clear that EEOC will consider ways to minimize burdens on business.

     10. Next Steps. If you are okay with     it, we'll go back to Daschle and get
     the final language together, I'm sort    of surprised that we've been able to
     get Treasury, Commerce, and OMB to go    along with this, and I want to go
     ahead before we have minds changing.     We're shooting to have something for
     the April 7th event.




