RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-APR-1997 18:38:56.00

SUBJECT:   McCaffrey's & Reno's line is in this story. They suck.

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I want you to know that i sent the last message before i read this story,
which confirms just what i said.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 04/29/97 06:42
PM ---------------------------



        BURKE D @ Al
        04/29/97 06:32:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Michelle Crisci, Elena Kagan, Leanne A. Shimabukuro
cc:
Subject: McCaffrey's & Reno's line is in this story.  They suck.

Date: 04/29/97 Time: 17:53
CCrack, powder cocaine sentences should be balanced, panel

    WASHINGTON (AP)    A sentencing panel recommended narrowing the
wide disparity in federal sentencing laws that treat trafficking in
crack cocaine more harshly than selling the powdered variety.
     --Although research and public policy may support somewhat
higher penalties for crack than for powder cocaine, a 100-to-l
quantity ratio cannot be justified,"   the U.S. Sentencing
commission said in a report to Congress Tuesday.
     Federal law requires a five-year minimum sentence for people
caught selling 5 or more grams of crack. However, someone convicted
of trafficking powder cocaine would get the same sentence only if
500 grams or ·more were involved.
    Noting that blacks make up almost 90 percent of those convicted
in federal court of distributing crack, the commission said, --The
current penalty structure results in a perception of unfairness and
inconsistency. ' ,
    In 1995, President Clinton and Congress rejected the sentencing
commission's recommendation to equalize penalties for trafficking
in crack and powder cocaine.
    But Clinton said Tuesday his administration will give the new
recommendation --very serious consideration."
    --The sentencing laws must continue to reflect that crack
cocaine is a more harmful form of cocaine, " the president said in
a statement issued by the White House. --However, some adjustment
to the cocaine penalty structure is warranted as a matter of sound
criminal justice policy. ' ,
    Clinton said federal prosecutors should target mid- and
high-level drug traffickers instead of low-level dealers. He said
he has asked Attorney General Janet Reno and drug policy adviser
Barry McCaffrey to review the proposal and report to him within 60
days.
    Reno and McCaffrey said in a joint statement the proposal
--moves us in the right direction."   They said the current policy
does not adequately target federal prosecutions toward mid- and


high-level cocaine sellers and also "appears to have a
disproportionate racial impact."
    The sentencing commission recommended that for crack cocaine,
Congress raise the 5-gram trigger for a five-year mandatory
sentence to somewhere between 25 and 75 grams. For powder cocaine,
the 500-gram threshold for the same sentence should be lowered to a
level between 125 and 375 grams, the panel said.
    Penalties for selling other amounts of crack and powder should
be similarly adjusted, the panel said.
    And, it recommended reducing the penalty for simple possession
of crack to the level now in effect for powder cocaine. Currently,
a five-year sentence. is required for possession of 5 or more grams
of crack, while possession of powder in any amount is punishable by
no more than one year in prison.
    "All of these drugs cause great harm to individuals and to
society at large,"  the commission said, but it added that violent
street crime and addiction are more often associated ·with crack
distribution.
    Raising the amount of crack required for a five-year minimum
sentence will focus federal prosecutions more on mid- and
high-level sellers, the panel said. Sentences still can be
increased for dealers who use guns or are involved in violence, it
added.
    The commission said federal prosecutions should target "serious
dealers"  while leaving other prosecutions to the states. The vast
majority of drug prosecutions now occur in state courts.
    commission Chairman Richard P. Conaboy said in an interview,
"We want to target those defendants that are the most culpable and
the most violent with the longest sentences. We think this will do
that. ' ,
    The proposal was criticized by a group called Families Against
Mandatory Minimums, whose president, Julie Stewart, said the
disparity between crack and powder cocaine sentences should be
eliminated as the commission recommended in 1995.
APNP-04-29-97 1805EDT




